The 1986 Atlantic hurricane season officially started on June 1, 1983, and ended on November 30. The season had a total of 6 named storms and 4 hurricanes.
Tropical Storm Andrew.
Tropical Depression One formed on June 5 north of the Bahamas. It strengthened into Tropical Storm Andrew the next day. Andrew traveled along the East Coast of the United States, creating giant waves and high surf along the shore but with minor damages. Andrew dissipated south of Cape Cod. One person drowned off the North Carolina coast in high surf, but no major damages was reported.
Hurricane Bonnie.
Tropical Depression Two formed south of the Louisiana coast on June 23 and quickly strengthened into a hurricane. Bonnie made landfall on the upper Texas coast near High Island. Streets were flooded throughout southeast Texas, mobile homes were destroyed, and three people were killed. Bonnie caused $2 million (1986 USD) in damage.
Hurricane Charley.
A tropical depression formed off the coast of the Florida and moved inland. The depression then travelled across Florida and exited the coast near Savannah, Georgia, and strengthened into Tropical Storm Charley. Charley continued moving up the coastline, and the storm strengthened into a hurricane before moving across the Outer Banks and Delmarva Peninsula. Charley then moved out into the sea, later became extratropical in the north Atlantic Ocean, and later brought bad weather across the British Isles on August 25 where it caused major damages.
Tropical Storm Danielle.
On September 1, a tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa and moved west. The disturbance was below the 10 degree latitude as it developed into a tropical depression on September 7 and then strengthened into a tropical storm later that day. Danielle peaked as a 60 mph storm on September 8, while a Reconnaissance Aircraft reported gusts of up to hurricane force. After passing through the Lesser Antilles, Danielle came across vertical wind shear, and on September 10, it dissipated in the central Caribbean Sea. The remnants of Danielle continued to move west and eventually redeveloped in the Pacific Ocean as Tropical Storm Lester.
Hurricane Earl.
The strongest storm of the season began as a tropical wave off Africa on September 4. After moving across the tropical Atlantic Ocean it strengthened as Tropical Depression Five on September 10 while about 1240 miles (2000 km) east of Puerto Rico. The depression quickly strengthened and reached hurricane strength on September 11; Earl reached its strongest point on September 12, as a Category 2 hurricane as it travelled in a half circle.
The hurricane weakened to a Category 1 on September 16 and bounced back the way it came. Earl then turned north and became extratropical southeast of Newfoundland on September 19. At its strongest point, Earl had sustained winds of 105 mph (170 km/h) and a minimum central pressure of 979 mbar. [ftp://ftp.nhc.noaa.gov/pub/storm_archives/atlantic/prelimat/atl1986/earl/prelim03.gif]
Hurricane Frances.
Tropical Depression Six formed on November 18 and quickly strengthened into a tropical storm. The storm curved northeast and strengthened further, reaching hurricane strength on November 20. However, a high pressure system to the north caused the storm to fall apart. Frances was later destroyed by an extratropical low on November 21.
