The 1857 War of Independence in Murree, part of the Indian Rebellion of 1857, was a conflict between the tribes surrounding the hill station of Murree (now Pakistan) and the colonial government of British India. The local tribes had become angry with the British ever since the British had started their colonial rule in the area.
Today Murree is part of Pakistan but in 1857 it was part of British India, ever since the British rule began in India there had been rebellions and wars against the British. However in 1857 rebellions broke out in many different places, Murree being one of these places. People thought the rule of the British was about to be overthrown. In the Murree hills it was the Dhund Abbasi and Tanoli tribes who rose up against the British.
Background.
Although the tribes of Murree had risen against the British, not everyone had been against British rule. Before British rule had been established in the area, the tribes had fought against the Sikhs. Under the command of Mohammed Ali Shah (also known as the Pir of Plasi), they had fought against the Sikh Army in Balakot - the troops here were commanded by Seyed Shah Ismail Shahid and Syed Ahmad Shaheed (known as "The Martyrs").
The Pir of Dewal had also died fighting in Dewal against the Sikh army chief Hari Singh Nalwa, Nalwa then built a fort on between Punjab and NWFP in 1815, now called Aarhi or Hadd. Nalwa's troops had brutally crushed the tribes of Circle Bakote and beheaded many of them. He also sold the ladies of these tribes in Jammu central bazaar in 1834,
The British, after battling in Rawalpindi in 1845 had captured Jind Kaur, the widow of Ranjit Singh (the former Ruler of Punjab) - this caused the collapse of Sikh rule and, when the British marched into the Murree area, the local tribes at first welcomed them. However, many of the tribes soon considered that they had exchanged one form of occupation for another and events elsewhere in India also encouraged an uprising.
The British had recruited many of the tribes in the area into their army, for example many members of the Satti Tribe were recruited as Sepoys and the British commanders (like elsewhere across Colonial India) won this war largely by the use of Indian soldiers.
War reaches Murree.
The masterminds of this plan of independence were two Seyed brothers from Dhoke Syedan of Dewal Sharif. The War against the British had reached Murree and the Southern Areas of Hazara part of which is now known as Circle Bakote in July 1857 when the Dhond Abbasi leader Sardar Sherbaz Khan planned to attack the British.
Sardar Khan had the support of the following important tribal leaders.
Attack on Murree.
By the end of August many of the British troops who had been in Murree had left to join the attack on Delhi. Rebels had taken Delhi from British control and the British had sent as many soldiers as they could. The decision to send troops to Delhi meant that the defence of Murree was weakened. However the British were unable to take Delhi quickly, and as Delhi still held out against the British the Dhund tribesmen decided to take Murree. The Dhund attacked Murree by rising on every side at the same time and crowding up the nearer hill-sides threatening destruction of the station. Several of the table-servants supported the hill-men, and for some hours the danger to Murree became imminent.
According to the 1857 Punjab Mutiny Report the attack failed because the British were told of the plan to attack them. One of Lady Lawrence's servants, named Hakim Khan, told the British of the attack to come. The loyalty of Hakim was described in the report as "the means, under God, of saving Murree." The British quickly organised defences, and quickly got volunteers. A cordon of sentries surrounded the station and the three weakest points were held in some force. When the Dhunds arrived in the middle of the night they found the whole station waiting for them.
After a few hours of skirmishing the Dhonds retreated with the loss of two or three of their men who had come within musket range of the British. The British however were to learn that the rebellion was wider than just the Dhonds. After the Dhoonds had been forced back, it was found that many more clans and tribes had been part of the plan. It had reached far into Hazara and nearly down to Rawalpindi; and, apart from the Khurrul rebellion in Multan, was largest rebellion that had occurred in the Punjab during that year.
The British also convicted and executed two Hindustani doctors for being involved in the plot. They had been educated in government institutions, were practising in Murree and employed by the government. The British suspected that the Dhonds were expecting support from their Hindustani allies, so as well as the doctors several domestic servants were seized and punished.
An urgent request was sent to troops in Hazara to reinforce Murree and Major Beecher sent every available man from Abbottabad to Murree - however the British troops in Murree had managed to secure the station and beat off the attack before the arrival of reinforcements.
According the Punjab Mutiny report however, the reinforcement themselves were almost ambushed. The march from Abbottabad to Murree was difficult. The Khurrals laid an ambush to cut them off, but they were saved by luck. The Khurral had set traps and were waiting to ambush the British on a road, however the rains made the road hard to cross. The British took another road to Murree and were later to learn of the trap..
Aftermath.
The revolt did not succeed, he rebels were betrayed and, as punishment, all of Sardar Sherbaz Khan's eight sons were blasted by cannon fire in Murree whilst Sardar Khan himself was hanged.
