The 1994 Atlantic hurricane season was the time from June 1 to November 30, 1994 when hurricanes officially formed in the Atlantic Ocean. Storms sometimes form before and after these dates but most storms form during the season. However in this season no Tropical Cyclone formed after November 30, the end of the season because the last storm, Hurricane Gorden died on November 21 just nine days before the 30th.
The season was unusual in that it produced no major hurricanes, which are those of Category 3 status or higher on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. The strongest, Hurricane Florence, it's top winds were at a Category 2 storm with winds of 110 mph (175 km/h). Aside from Chris, Florence, and Gordon, none of the storms became hurricanes.
Tropical Storm Alberto.
Alberto formed from a north-moving tropical depression north of the Yucatán Peninsula on July 2. Tropical Storm Alberto continued north, making landfall near Destin, Florida on July 3 as a moderately strong tropical storm. The storm weakened quickly to a tropical depression, which then moved around Georgia and Alabama until it dissipated on July 7. Damage was guessed at $500 million (1994 USD) and 30 deaths were caused by the effects of Tropical Storm Alberto.
Tropical Depression Two.
Tropical Depression Two formed near South Carolina on the 19th. The depression moved north making landfall in South Carolina and dissipated on July 23rd. No damage or deaths reported.
Tropical Storm Beryl.
Beryl formed off the Florida panhandle on August 15, only twelve hours before it made landfall near Panama City, Florida. Beryl quickly strengthened before landfall and reached it's top winds of 60 mph. Beryl caused inland flooding as it moved through Georgia, across the Carolinas, and all the way to Connecticut where it was absorbed by a frontal system. Damage was guessed at $73 million (1994 USD). Though it caused no deaths, alot of people were injured by the 37 tornadoes Beryl produced as it weakened.
Hurricane Chris.
Chris formed midway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde on August 17, and reached hurricane strength the next day. It moved to the northwest and turned north and brushed Bermuda as a weak tropical storm on the 21st. Chris continued north, and dissapated without causing any damage
Tropical Depression Five.
The wave that would become Tropical Depression Five was tracked beginning on August 17. The wave was upgraded into a depression on August 29 near the Yucatan Peninsula. Tropical Depression Five made landfall in Tampico on the 31st and dissipating the same day over Mexico. No damage was caused by Tropica Depression Five.
Tropical Storm Debby.
Tropical Storm Debby formed on September 10, just east of the lesser antilies. The storm crossed some of the islands, and dissipated south of Puerto Rico on the 11th. Nine people dead because of Tropical Storm Debby. Damage estimates are not available. It cause flooding and mudslides in Saint Lucia.
Tropical Storm Ernesto.
Ernesto formed southwest of Cape Verde on September 22 it became Tropical Storm Ernesto. It moved north for two days, and by the 24th had weakened to a tropical depression. Two days later Ernesto dissipated without affecting any land.
Tropical Depression Eight.
Tropical Depression Eight formed on September 19 in the southwestern Caribbean Sea. The wave strengthened into Tropical Depression Eight on September 24 near Honduras. Tropical Depression Eight made landfall in Mexico and dissipated the next day over Guatemala. Some reports show that the remnants of Eight became Tropical Depression Ten.
Tropical Depresssion Nine.
Tropical Depression Nine form off the coast of Africa on September 26. It was upgraded to the ninth depression of the 1994 season, 150 miles southeast from the Cape Verde Islands the next day. The depression moved north and dissipated on September 29.
Tropical Depression Ten.
An area of disturbed weather, related to Tropical Depression Eight, moved across the northwest Caribbean Sea and the Yucatan Peninsula. A tropical wave moved into the area, causing an increase in showers and cloudiness. The wave became Tropical Depression Ten on September 29 about 150 miles off the coast of Cuba. The system became better-organized and when the depression moved into the Gulf of Mexico, it was absorbed by a non-tropical system on 30th. Tropical Depression Ten caused $5 million in damage (1994 USD).
Hurricane Florence.
Florence, at first formed as a subtropical depression in the central Atlantic on November 2. As it northwest, it took on tropical characteristics and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Florence on the 4th. It reached hurricane strength, then turned to the northeast and on November 6, as it was picked up by a strong trough. Two days later Florence was absorbed by the same trough that made it turn northeast. There was no reported damage.
Hurricane Gordon.
Hurricane Gordon was a very deadly and damaging tropical storm for the Caribbean, Florida and parts of North Carolina. The storm was very slow moving on its path over the Caribbean. This storm killed over 1100 people (estimates range between 500-2300 people dead through Haiti and the central Caribbean islands, including Jamaica and Cuba). The storm's strange motion was making Hurricane Gordon hard to forecast where it would actually go and where it would reach land. Damage was guessed to be at $400 million (1994 US dollars).
Nor'easter.
Around Cristmas in 1994 a nor'easter may have had tropical characteristics, though it was not called a tropical system. It affected the Mid-Atlantic and New England causing damage at $21 million.
