The 2008 Pacific hurricane season was an event in the annual cycle of tropical cyclone formation. It officially started May 15, 2008 in the eastern Pacific, started on June 1, 2008 in the central Pacific, and lasted until November 30, 2008.
This season is the first since 1996 to have no cyclones cross into the central Pacific. Activity this year was near average, with 16 storms forming in the Eastern Pacific proper and an additional 1 in the Central Pacific. There were 7 hurricanes, a low number compared to the typical 9, and only 2 major hurricanes, unlike the typical 5. There were only a few notable storms this year. Tropical Storm Alma made landfall along the Pacific coast of Nicaragua, becoming the first known storm to do so. It killed 9 and did $33 million in damage (2008 USD). Hurricane Norbert became the strongest hurricane to hit the western side of the Baja Peninsula on record, killing 8 and causing an unknown amount of damage there.
Tropical Storm Alma.
An area of low pressure formed early on May 27 about 220 nm southwest of Nicaragua. it then intensified and became the first tropical depression of the 2008 season late the next day. It then strengthened into a tropical storm early on May 29, and was named Alma. Alma then rapidly strengthened reaching her peak winds of 65 mph just before Alma made landfall on the Northwestern coast of Nicaragua near León at peak strength.
León lost electricity and telephone services as the storm impacted the area, trees were toppled and some houses lost roofs. In total nine people were killed with seven of them being indirect; the two direct deaths were in Nicaragua in León. On May 30th the remnant low of Alma emerged into the Gulf of Honduras and merged with a tropical wave over the north western Caribbean sea which then became Tropical Storm Arthur later that day.
Tropical Storm Douglas.
Tropical Storm Douglas was the fourth named storm of the 2008 Pacific hurricane season. Douglas developed out of a tropical wave that formed off the African coast on June 19 and traversed the Atlantic Ocean. On June 27, the wave crossed Central America and entered the Pacific Ocean. On July 1, the storm developed into Tropical Depression Four-E while located 245 nmi (250 km) southwest of Manzanillo, Mexico as it traveled to the northwest. Despite being dislocated from most of the convection by strong wind shear, the depression gradually became better organized and on the afternoon July 2, the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Douglas. Upon the upgrade, Douglas reached its peak intensity of 40 mph (65 km) and minimum pressure of 1003 mbar (hPa; 29.63 inHg). Douglas weakened to a tropical depression overnight on July 3. The depression became devoid of convection shortly after and was further downgraded to a remnant low-pressure area on the morning of July 4 as it turned towards the west. The remnant low continued to weaken and completely dissipated on July 6.
Due to the proximity to land, outer rain bands associated with Douglas produced tropical storm force winds in Manzanillo, Mexico. Minor flood damage was reported along the coastline in Colima, Jalisco, and Nayarit. On July 2, a ship located to the southwest of the center reported a sustained wind of 30 mph (50 km/h).
Tropical Depression Five-E.
In early July, a strong tropical wave southwest of the Mexican coast slowly developed. It became Tropical Depression Five-E on July 5. It then headed west-northwest before turning more northwest and making landfall near Lázaro Cárdenas, Mexico on July 7. The storm dissipated shortly after landfall. Its remnants brought rainfall to southern Mexico, but caused no severe flooding, casualties, or serious damage in its path.
Hurricane Elida.
Late on July 11, an area of low pressure situated a few hundred miles south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec acquired sufficient organized convection to be classified as Tropical Depression Six-E. The depression soon strengthened into Tropical Storm Elida. On July 13, Elida slowly gained strength as it was near Mexico. Overnight on July 14, Elida strengthened into the second hurricane of the season as it pulled away from the coast.
After remaining stable in intensity for two days, it rapidly strengthened on July 16 into a Category 2 hurricane. That day Elida peaked as a 105 mph (165 km/h) Category 2 hurricane, the strongest of the season at that time Only Hurricane Hernan was stronger. Elida was a Category 2 for about 36 hours and later weakened into a Category 1 hurricane.
Twelve hours after Elida weakened to a Category 1, Elida weakened to a tropical storm. Elida weakened to a tropical depression on July 19 as the low became exposed and dissipated that afternoon.
A few days later the wave slowly gained convection as it crossed in the CPHC area of responsibility, however as it neared Hawaii its chance of regeneration diminished.
Elida's outer rainbands reached Mexico. However, no watches or warnings were issued. Elida was briefly foretasted to make landfall in Hawaii. However Elida, dissipated before it hit the state. The remnants of Elida did give showers in Hawaii.
Tropical Storm Julio.
On August 23, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) upgraded an area of low presure which was located in the eastern Pacific ocean south of Baja California to Tropical Depression Eleven E. Later that morning, Tropical Storm Wactes went up. That afternoon, the depression intensified into a tropical storm after a ship report supported tropical storm intensity. It made landfall in La Paz after becoming a tropical storm with 50 mph winds and a well-defined center, Mexico as a tropical storm on August 24, weakened, and dissipated August 26.
As Julio made landfall, it produced lightning and locally heavy rainfall, which left more than a dozen communities isolated due to flooding. The flooding damaged several houses and killed two people. Winds were generally light, although strong enough to damage a few electrical poles and small buildings. Moisture from Julio developed thunderstorms across Arizona, including one near Chandler which produced winds of 75 mph (120 km/h); the storm damaged ten small planes at Chandler Municipal Airport, as well as a hangar. The storms also dropped light rainfall, reaching over 1 inch (25 mm) in Gilbert, which caused flooding on Interstate 17.
Tropical Storm Lowell.
Tropical Storm Lowell developed out of monsoonal trough located off the southwest coast of Mexico on the morning of September 5. A weak area of low pressure was found embedded within a large area of scattered moderate and isolated strong convection. The low failed to develop and was not mentioned in the tropical weather discussions for the rest of the day. On September 6, a new low had formed on the western side of the trough. The low was poorly defined but global forecast models were anticipating cyclogenesis within the next two days.
Southwest of Manzanillo, Mexico, the area of thunderstorms strengthened into Tropical Storm Lowell on the night of September 6. The system skipped tropical depression status and was named "Lowell". Lowell slowly strengthened into a 50 mph Tropical Storm. A tropical storm watch was issued for southern Baja California as the storm headed north, but it weakened to a tropical depression on September 9. The next day Tropical Depression Lowell made landfall with 35 mph winds. It moved inland and dissipated on September 11. The remnants of Tropical Storm Lowell continued across the United States and joined with a cold front bringing heavy rains to the central northern states before tracking into Canada. It caused the heaviest rainstorm ever recorded in Chicago since records began in 1877.
Lowell made landfall as a tropical depression in Baja California but its affects where felt at more inland areas. In Michoacan, Sonora, and Sinaloa, flooding from Lowell's remnants left more than 26500 people homeless. No deaths were reported.
Damage in Sonora totaled over 200 million pesos - $15.5 million in 2008 USD.
Moisture from Lowell eventually joined with a cold front and the remnants of Hurricane Ike and caused significant damage. As this conglomeration of moisture traveled through the United States it caused extensive flooding in Illinois. In Chicago it broke flooding records dating back to 1871.
Hurricane Norbert.
Late in September, a vigorous tropical wave moved off the west coast of Mexico. By October 1, the National Hurricane Center issued a high probability (over 50% chance of development in the next 48 hours) for development into a tropical cyclone, but as the wave stalled offshore, it began losing vigor, with the NHC reducing the likelihood to medium (20-50% chance for development in the next 48 hours) the next day. As of 2100 UTC October 3, the likelihood of development within the next 48 hours was high again. Then, late that night, the wave developed into Tropical Depression Fifteen-E, and then into Tropical Storm Norbert 24 hours later.
Norbert ultimately became a hurricane on October 7 and rapidly intensified to a Category 2 hurricane and it became a major hurricane on October 8, the second of the season and the first since Hurricane Hernan. It continued to strengthen into a Category 4 hurricane before weakening back to a Category 3 by the morning of October 9th, and weakened into a Category 1 hurricane that afternoon, but restrengthened into a Category 2 the next day, and became a minimal major hurricane the next morning, and it made landfall in Baja California as a Category 2 later that morning. Norbert then hit the mainland of Mexico as a Category 1 hurricane, killing 8. The final advisory on Norbert was issued on the morning of October 12.
Hurricane Norbert struck Mexico's Baja California peninsula on Saturday with torrential rains and winds of up to 155 km/h. Strong winds bent palm trees along coastal areas. Some streets were in knee-deep water in the town of Puerto San Carlos. Norbert was ripping off roofs, knocking down trees and left one person missing and more than 20,000 homes without electricity, local authorities say. Some 2850 people were housed in temporary shelters. Forty per cent of homes were totally or partially damaged on the islands of Margarita and Magdalena, mainly having lost their roofs, said a report from state protection services. La Paz international airport suspended its activities at midday local time Saturday, but the tourist resort of Los Cabos remained open. Hotel reservations were down by around 40 per cent mainly in Los Cabos and Loreto, local tourism officials said.
Norbert was a Category 2 hurricane at landfall, which made Norbert the first October hurricane to strike the western Baja California peninsula since Hurricane Pauline forty years prior, and Norbert was the stronger of the two.
Tropical Storm Odile.
In early October, a tropical wave formed near Nicaragua. Remaining Stationary until October 6 or October 7, the wave dumped heavy rain on the area, although damages or deaths, if any, have yet to be reported. On October 8, the wave became better organized as the National Hurricane Center increased the odds of development from the system. Then, later that day, the wave developed into Tropical Depression Sixteen-E, the sixteenth tropical cyclone of the active season. On the morning of October 9, it became Tropical Storm Odile, a short lived storm while located southwest of Guatemala.
Odile slowly strengthened over the next few days.
On October 10 tropical storm watches were issued in Mexico as it strengthened into a tropical storm with winds of 60 mph. That night Odile made it closest approach to the area it came within. After making it closest approach to Mexico, an Aircraft investigated Odile as it peaked as a 65 mph tropical storm. Over the next several days, however, Odile slowly weakened and dissipated on October 12, the same day that Hurricane Norbert met its demise.
Eighteen hours after it was named, a Tropical Storm Watch was issued form Punta Maalaldnado to Zihuatanejo. It was replaced with a warning 12 hours later. Before becoming a tropical wave, the precursor disturbance to Odile dumped heavy rainfall on Nicaragua, although as of 2100 UTC October 8, 2008, any impact is unknown. Odile also caused rain in Mexico, but any impact is unknown.
