The 2006 Pacific hurricane season was an event in the annual cycle of tropical cyclone formation. It officially began May 15, 2006 in the eastern Pacific, designated as the area east of 140°W, and began on June 1 2006 in the central Pacific, which is between the International Date Line and 140°W. Both seasons officially ended on November 30, 2006. These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the eastern Pacific basin.
Tropical Storm Aletta.
Aletta staled offshore Mexico causing minor damage.
Tropical Depression Two-E.
Two-E produced 15 inches of rain in Mexico.
Hurricane Bud.
Bud was a Category 3 storm. it rapidly strengthened and then weakened just as fast.
Hurricane Carlota.
Carlota caused light rain in Mexico but no damage was reported. It was a Category 1 storm.
Hurricane Daniel.
Daniel was a long lived Major hurricane that Affected Hawaii with some rain. It peaked as a Category 4. It was the second strongest storm this year.
Tropical Storm Emilia.
It caused some rain in Mexico, causing minor damage.
Tropical Storm Fabio.
Fabio caused heave rainfall in Hawaii.
Tropical Storm Gilma.
Gilma produced light rain in Mexico. It was also the weakest storm so far.
Hurricane Hector.
Hector was a Category 2 hurricane. It made it to the Central Pacific.
Hurricane Ioke.
Ioke was the strongest hurricane ever in the Central Pacific that threated the Johnson Atoll and Wake Island. It formed on august 20. Ioke rapidly became a major hurricane 36 hours later. Ioke went extratropical on September 6. damage was nearly 100 million dollars. Ioke was retired at the end of the year. It also caused heavy rain in Alaska. Ioke is the most intense storm ever in the central Pacific and the only Category 5 storm that formed in the basin.
Hurricane Illena.
Illena killed one person in Mexico. It peaked as a Cateogory 3 storm.
Hurricane John.
John killed 5 when it hit Baja California as a Category 2 storm. It peaked as a Category 4.
Hurricane Kristy.
Kristy was outflowed by Hurricane John.
Hurricane Lane.
Lane caused damage in Mexico, when it hit there as a Major Hurricane.
Tropical Storm Norman.
Norman struck Mexico as a tropical depression, causing minor damage.
Hurricane Paul.
Paul was a Cateogory 2 hurricane that killed 4 in Mexico.
Tropical Storm Rosa.
Rosa produced light rain to Mexico in November.
Hurricane Sergio.
Sergio was also a Cateogory 2 storm. It was also the strongest November storm.
