Anchors are used to stop boats from moving. Today, anchors are usually made of metal, and they are made to catch the ocean floor (the seabed).
There are two main types of anchors: temporary and permanent. A permanent anchor is called a "mooring block" and is not easily moved. A temporary anchor can be moved and is carried on the boat. When people talk about anchors, they are usually thinking about temporary anchors.
An anchor works by either weight (mass) or shape. Shape is more important to temporary anchors, and design is very important. Anchors must resist wind and tide, and also the up-and-down movement of waves.
History.
The oldest anchors were just rocks, and many rock anchors have been found from a long time ago. Many modern moorings still use a large rock as the mooring block.
A simple anchor which uses two arms made of wood, and a rock weight, is an anchor which is still used today. The wood arms are sharp to enter the seabed, and the weight will hold normal movement.
Designs of temporary anchors.
The English language uses several special words to describe parts of anchors. This is because England has a rich marine and naval history, and so the language gives a large number of words to boat and ship terminology.
A modern temporary anchor usually has a middle bar called the "shank", attached to a flat surface (traditionally called "fluke") which holds the seabed. The place where the shank meets the fluke is called the "crown", and the shank is usually fitted with a ring or shackle to attach it to the "rode" (cable, chain, or rope joining the anchor to the boat). Some old anchors have attached to the shank a "stock", which is a bar that places the anchor in a certain way when it falls on the seabed. Old anchors are often named "stocked" or "stockless" anchors depending on whether they have this, or not.
Over the last 20 years, many new anchor designs have appeared. These anchors are usually designed for small vessels, and are usually not for large ships. See modern designs.
Fisherman.
The Fisherman is a traditional old design. It is very old and has not changed much over time. It is less useful than a good modern design, and its holding power for its weight is among the worst of all anchor types.
Fluke.
The most common brand of fluke anchors is the "Danforth". The Danforth style uses a stock at the crown (see above), to which two large flat flukes are attached. The stock can rotate, so the flukes can move toward the bottom. It can hold very well but has difficulty "setting" (entering the seabed) on its own. It is efficient for its weight.
Fluke anchors have difficulty penetrating kelp and weed seabeds, as well as very hard sand or clay seabeds. Once set, the anchor can come free and fail to "reset" on its own.
Grapnel.
A traditional design, the grapnel style is simple to design and build. It is a simple hook, and while useless for most seabeds, it is good for rock or reefs.
Plow.
The original "CQR" was invented in 1933 in the United Kingdom. Many copies of it now exist. Plows used to be popular with sailors and private boaters. They are good but not excellent in most seabeds. Another more recent design is the "Delta" which is better.
Plows use a special weight in the tip of the fluke (the "toe") for them to work properly. This makes them heavy.
The genuine CQR and Delta brands are now owned by Lewmar.
Bruce / Claw.
The genuine Bruce was invented in the 1970's and was intended to solve some of the problems of the plow. Many copies are now made - this type of anchor is now called a "claw-type". They can set quickly in some seabeds, but do not hold well for their weight, and can let go very suddenly.
Bruce Anchor Group no longer make the genuine Bruce and the copies are mostly worse in quality of build.
Modern designs.
Modern anchors are designed to be better than the plow and claw types. Many are new, still under patent and owned by commercial companies or tied to certain brands.
Performance of temporary anchors.
In general, the more modern designs are better than the older types, as can be seen from the chart on the left.
This is a chart of testing carried out by West Marine (an American marine shop) in 2006. Tests were conducted at three different locations on sand, at three different "scopes" (pull angles).
While six of the seven best anchors on this chart are "modern", several modern anchors are also seen to perform very badly. This demonstrates that 'newer' is not necessarily better.
Designs of permanent anchors.
These are used where the vessel or object is permanently placed, for example in the case of lightvessels or channel marker buoys. The anchor must hold the vessel in all weather, including the worst storm, but does not usually need to be moved.
Permanent anchors come in a wide range of types. A simple rock can be used. Large concrete blocks weighing many tonnes may be used. Modern moorings may be anchored by sand screws.
Mushroom.
The mushroom anchor is suitable where the seabed is composed of fine sand or soft mud.
It is shaped like a mushroom. It is a bit better than a simple weight, but not as good as a temporary anchor design of the same weight. They must be allowed to set by sinking over a long time.
