Armani, is an Italian fashion house (fashion designer company). It started in Milan in 1975 by Giorgio Armani and Sergio Galeotti, with $10,000. The company designs and makes several different types of things, including fashion accessories, clothing, cosmetics, fragrances, home decorations, jewelry, glasses, and watches.
Armani Collezioni.
"Armani Collezioni" is a high-class label from fashion designer Giorgio Armani. The label is more expensive than the "Armani Exchange", "Armani Jeans" and "Emporio Armani" labels but less expensive than the "Giorgio Armani" label(sometimes named the "Armani black label") and "Armani Privé".
The label is usually for older buyers who do not want new designs, but has older high quality clothes.
It replaced the "Giorgio Armni Le Collezioni" line. As well as being sold as the only product in some small shops, it is also sold in expensive department stores such as Harrods, Harvey Nichols, David Jones, Nordstrom and Neiman Marcus.
Emporio Armani.
"Emporio Armani" is an Armani label that is for younger adults. The label is the third cheapest Armani label and can be bought at its 13 American small shops and more than 140 small shops in total in the world, making it the largest sold Armani label. Products by this label include quick and easy to wear clothes, sunglasses, perfume, accessories and watches. The line is considered a "bridge line" as it features higher-end products than "Armani Exchange" or "Armani Jeans" but is not as expensive as the exclusive "Armani Collezioni" or "Giorgio Armani" ('black label') lines. "Emporio Armani" is sold in small shops that only sell "Emporio Armani", and also in expensive department stores, and through their online shops.
Armani Exchange.
"Armani Exchange" (often "A|X") was made in 1991. It is for younger buyers, often in their older teenage years. It uses city fashion, quick and easy to wear clothes, especially T-shirts, jeans, polos, and sports coats. Armani Exchange is the cheapest of all the Armani labels and is mainly sold in the USA.
The label has 69 shops and 6 outlets in the United States and over 50 shops in other countries. The UK's first shops opened at Bluewater in Kent, "The Trafford Centre" in Manchester and in the Metquater inLiverpool.
Size.
At the end of 2005, sales were $1.69 billion.
Today, the company has 4,700 workers and 13 factories in the world. It has nearly 300 shops in the world, which are in 36 different countries. The company has started a very high-class collection named Armani Privé, which can be seen in the "Haute Couture fashion week" in Paris.
Armani Hotels.
Armani agreed in 2004 with Emaar Properties to make some expensive hotels in some big cities, such as London, Paris, New York, Tokyo, Shanghai, Dubai and Milan. The company already has many cafes in the world, as well as a bar, a restaurant and a nightclub.
Emaar Hotels agreed to build and operate at least seven expensive hotels and three holiday resorts under the "Armani" name. Armani would design the inside of the buildings and the style of the hotels. The first hotel in Dubai is thought to be ready in early 2008.
The bottom 37 floors of the Burj Dubai skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, will have the world's first Armani Hotel, and Giorgio Armani is also designing the inside of the skyscraper.
