Adolf Hitler (April 20, 1889 in Braunau am Inn, Austria - April 30, 1945 in Berlin) was a German politician who was the leader of the Nazi party. He became Chancellor of Germany in 1933 and became dictator of Germany in 1934. He called himself "Führer" (leader) of the German Empire. He ruled until 1945 when he killed himself.
When Hitler was ruler, Nazis created the dictatorship of the so-called Third Reich. In 1933, they blocked out all the other political parties. Their enemies were killed or arrested. Hitler and his men also took the civil rights of European Jews and other ethnic, religious or political minorities. In what is called The Holocaust, the Nazis killed many of them. They also started World War II, which destroyed Europe. Because of Hitler, at least 44 million people were killed, about 6 million of them were Jews.
Hitler's Life story.
Adolf Hitler was born on April 20, 1889 at Braunau am Inn, a small town near Linz in the province of Upper Austria, close to the German border, in what was then Austria-Hungary.
Hitler failed high school admission tests in Linz twice. He became interested in the anti-Semitic (anti-Jewish), Pan-German teachings of Professor
Leopold Poetsch.
In 1907, Hitler's mother died and because of that he was very depressed.
In 1909, Hitler went to Vienna to study art. He was not good enough for the Academy of Arts.
In 1913, Hitler was 24 years old. At that time, all young Austrian men had to join the army. Hitler did not like the Austrian army, so he left Austria for Germany. He lived in a German city, Munich.
In 1914, Hitler joined the German army. He fought for Germany in the First World War. He was wounded in the war. The government gave him the Iron Cross as a reward for fighting hard in the war.
In 1919, Hitler joined a small political party called the German Workers Party. He soon won the support of the party members. Two years later, he became the leader of the party. He renamed the party the National Socialist German Workers Party. It became known as the Nazi Party.
In 1923, Hitler tried to overthrow the Weimar Republic government (1918-36) in the Beer Hall Putsch. The putsch failed. The government killed 16 of his men (the 16 dead men were later declared saints in Nazi ideology). They also put Hitler in the Landsberg Prison. They said that he would stay in prison for 5 years, but they let him leave after 9 months. While he was in prison, he wrote a book with the help of his friend Rudolf Hess. At first, Hitler wanted to call the book "Four and a Half Years of Struggle against Lies, Stupidity and Cowardice". In the end, he called the book "Mein Kampf" or My Struggle. The book said that Germany would take land from Poland and Russia. It also had many anti-semitic comments, and called for the murder and expulsion of Jews from Germany.
In 1933 Hitler was elected into the German government. He ended freedom of speech, and put his enemies in jail or killed them. He did not allow any other party except the Nazi party. Hitler and his propaganda minister, Joseph Goebbels, spread extreme nationalism within Germany. All media had to praise the Nazis. Also, more people were born because Hitler wanted more people of the "master race" (by that he meant Aryan, or those with blue eyes and blond hair). He made Germany a totalitarian Nazi state. Aryanism was a myth, but Hitler and his friends believed it. They thought that people like the Jews and Slavs were inferior (less valuable) and should be killed.
World War II.
Hitler started World War II by ordering the German Army to invade Poland. His army conquered most of the Europe including Poland, France, and a large part of the Soviet Union. During the war he ordered the Nazis to kill many people, including women and children. The Nazis killed 6 million Jews, in The Holocaust. Other people that the Nazis killed were Roma (Gypsies), homosexuals, Slavs such as Russians and Poles, and his political opponents.
Finally the other countries in the world worked together to defeat Germany. Hitler lost all of the land that he had taken, and millions of Germans were killed. At the end of World War II, Hitler wanted everyone to die, including himself. He committed suicide (killed himself) in Berlin in 1945.
