Anger is a negative feeling which often happens when a person thinks that someone or something has done something wrong, bad or which puts them in danger, and they want to stop the risk, or punish the person for what they have done. Anger may be the brain's reaction if it thinks there may be pain - as part of the fight or flight decision (whether to attack or run away). When someone is angry, anger becomes the feeling that has the biggest effect on what they do, once a person makes the choice to do something without watiing, to stop something which they think is a threat which puts them in danger.
People show anger to others by their face, what they do with their body, not trying to understand or help other people's problems, and sometimes acts of aggression or force in public (e.g. punching a wall). Animals and humans might try to intimidate - for example they could make loud sounds, try to make their bodies look bigger, bare (show) their teeth, or stare.
Anger is a way to behave which is designed to make something showing aggression ("aggressors") stop its threatening behavior. Usually a fight will only happen after at least one of the people or animals fighting has shown anger. Most people who become angry explain that it happened as a result of "what has happened to them", though it makes the angry person less aware of themselves (and so less able to monitor or control themselves) and they tend to see the situation from their own viewpoint.
Being angry changes the human body by making the heart beat faster, increasing blood pressure (the pressure made by the blood at right angles of the walls of blood vessels) and increasing amounts of the hormones adrenaline and noradrenaline (chemicals which send messages to parts of the body to make changes).
Increased amounts of hormones and body changes.
Being angry makes the levels of the hormones adrenaline and noradrenaline in the body go up, although this does not last for very long.
Adrenaline quickly makes the body ready to act when there is important trouble by increasing the supply of oxygen and glucose (needed to make energy) to the brain and muscles, while slowing less important things the body is doing, like digesting food.
Noradrenaline is released during stress (making it a stress hormone) and goes to areas of the brain which control attention (how much and how strongly you think or concentrate) and reactions. It is very important in the when the body chooses "fight-or-flight" (attacking or running away), so it increases heart rate (speed at which the heart pumps), starting glucose being taken out of stores of energy, so it can be used, and increasing blood flow to particular muscles.
