Abalone (from Spanish "Abulón") are a type of shellfish.
Abalone are known by their richly coloured inside shell. This is also called ear-shell, "ormer" in Guernsey, "perlemoen" in South Africa, and "pāua" in New Zealand.
The meat of this shellfish is considered to be delicious in certain parts of Latin America (especially Chile), South East Asia, and East Asia (especially in China, Japan, and Korea).
Description.
Abalones occur all over the world. It is present along the waters of every continent, except the Atlantic coast of South America, the Caribbean, and the East Coast of the United States. Most abalones are found mainly in cold waters, along the coasts of New Zealand, South Africa and Australia, and Western North America and Japan in the Northern Hemisphere. In the Chilean vast Pacific coast, the species called loco ("Concholepas Concholepas", Bruguière, 1789) has a hard shell of a pitch-black color, and is widely eaten.
Abalone has unmistakable features: the shell is round to oval, with two to three whorls, and the last one is grown into a large "ear"-like shape, giving rise to the name 'ear-shell'. The inside of the shell is shiny coloured, from silvery white to green-red mother-of-pearl.
Abalones can start to reproduce at a small size. Their fertility is high and increases with size (from 10,000 to 11 million eggs at a time).
The young of albalones, called larvae, feed on plankton. The adults are eat plants and feed on algae. They prefer red algae. Sizes range from 20 mm to 200 mm or more.
Abalone shell.
The shell of the abalone is known for being very strong. It is made of very tiny calcium carbonate tiles stacked like bricks. Between the layers of tiles is a sticky protein substance. Allergic skin reactions and asthma attacks can also occur when breathing in the dust when these tiles are broken down.
The colorful inside of the abalone shell can be used for decorative inlays, in guitars, for example.
California.
Sport harvesting of Red Abalone is permitted with a California fishing license and an abalone stamp card. Abalone may only be taken using breath-hold techniques: freediving or shorepicking. SCUBA diving for abalone is strictly prohibited. Taking of abalone is not permitted south of the mouth of the San Francisco Bay. There is a size minimum of seven inches measured across the shell and a quantity limit of three per day and 24 per year. Abalone may only be taken in April, May, June, August, September, October and November; abalone may not be taken in July, December, January, February or March. Transportation of abalone may only legally occur while the abalone is still attached in the shell. Sale of sport obtained abalone is illegal, including the shell. Only Red Abalone may be taken; black, white, pink, and flat abalone are protected by law.
An abalone diver is normally equipped with a very thick wetsuit, including a hood, booties, and gloves. He or she would also wear a mask, snorkel, weight belt, abalone iron, and abalone gauge. It is common to take abalone in water a few inches up to 10 m/28' deep; less common are freedivers who can work deeper than 10 m/28'. Abalone are normally found on rocks near food sources (kelp). An abalone iron is used to pry the abalone from the rock before it can fully clamp down. Visibility is normally five to ten feet. Divers commonly dive out of boats, kayaks, tube floats or directly off the shore. An eight inch abalone is considered a good catch, a nine inch would be extremely good, and a ten inch plus (250 mm) abalone would be a trophy catch. Rock- or shore-picking is a separate method from diving where the rock picker feels underneath rocks at low tides for abalone.
There has been a trade in diving to catch abalones off parts of the United States coast from before 1939. In World War II, many of these abalone divers were recruited into the United States armed forces and trained as frogmen.
Farming.
There have been a number of attempts to artificially grow (farm) abalone for the purpose of consumption.
