The Anti-submarine boom net was used to stop enemy submarines entering Sydney Harbour during World War II. The net went all the way across the harbour from Green Point, Watson's Bay to Georges Head on the other side. The boom was part of the Sydney Harbour defences which also included artillery batteries and patrol boats.
History.
In January of 1942 the Australian defence forces began to build the anti-submarine boom net, it was finished in August 1942. For more than three years, entry by boats, ships and ferries into Sydney Harbour was through one of three different gates that were a part of the anti-submarine boom net.
On 31 May 1942 during WWII, three Japanese submarines tried to get into the harbour. The first submarine to try and come in was the M27. Lieutenant Jahai Chuma was the man in charge of this submarine. The M27 followed a Sydney ferry on its way to Manly for a short while, but it got caught in the western end of the net's middle section. Lieutenant Chuma, tried to free his submarine by using a special cutting tool that cuts metal, this only made things worse. By 8.30 pm the watchman for the Maritime Service Board, James Cargill became aware of what was happening. He used a boat to row across to where the Japanese submarine was stuck. Very surprised at finding a Japanese sub, Cargill contacted naval headquarters with his two way radio. At first the navy did not believe that there was a Japanese Midget submarine caught in the boom net. It took him two hours to get them to believe him.
By 10:27 pm, the boss ‘Chuma’ after realising that he had been found out, blew up the submarine using bombs, killing himself and his workmates as well. The two other submarines got through the boom net, which at the time wasn’t quite finished. They attacked shipping for many hours before they were destroyed as well.
In August of 1945, the boom net was dismantled, by early 1946; all except for the dolphin structure had been dismantled. The base of the winch house is all that remains and is the only remaining evidence of the anti-submarine boom net. It can still be seen at Green Point.
