The American Revolutionary War was a war fought between Great Britain and the 13 British colonies in North America. The war took place from 1775 to 1783. The Continental Army (Army of the colonies), led by George Washington, defeated the armies of the British Empire. The colonies became independant. They started the United States of America.
Causes.
The war came to be after years of problems between the British Empire and the colonists of North America. The colonists did not like many of the actions of the British government and taxes. The colonists fought to take land from the natives but they did not own it. They had to pay rent to the King in London. Many colonists did not think this was fair. In 1765, the British government passed a law called the Stamp Act. This law said that colonists had to buy stamps for all legal papers, newspapers, and even playing cards. The colonies did not follow this law. Large groups of people attacked people who were even thought to have the stamps. The law was changed in 1766. By this time, many colonists believed the revolution against King George III was already fought and won. The British sent more soldiers to keep control of the colonies. In 1774, the British passed the Intolerable Acts. Other battles were also fought before the war started. The Boston Tea Party and Boston Massacre caused people to become more mad about the situation.
Not all colonists wanted to leave the British Empire. The "Loyalists", or Tories, stayed loyal to Great Britain. They were not going to change their views. The "Patriots", who were said to have the opposite view of the Loyalists, wanted independence.
There were many papers written showing how the colonists felt. Thomas Paine wrote "Common Sense", a famous pamphlet about independence from Britain. Other colonial leaders, such as Samuel Adams, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, and Thomas Jefferson wanted independence.
Result.
Great Britain accepted the independence of the colonies. It also gave all the land it said it owned which was west of the Appalachians as far as the Mississippi River to the new country.
