Aaron Kwok is a popular Hong Kong singer and movie actor. He is one of the "Four Heavenly Kings" of Cantopop. He has been dubbed "Hong Kong's Michael Jackson" for his onstage dancing.
Aaron Kwok is one of Hong Kong and Asia's most important pop stars. Over the last decade or so, Kwok has won over a hundred music awards. As a solo performer, he has played in over 200 concerts around the world.
Biography.
After graduating from secondary school, Kwok worked as a junior staff in King Fook Gold and Jewellery Co. Ltd., as his father, who owns a gold retail store wanted Kwok to gain experience in the business and eventually taking over the family business.
In 1984, Aaron Kwok joined a dancer training course at HK-TVB, where his talent for dancing was shown. There, Kwok performed in PVs and a variety of TV shows. In 1985, Kwok's outstanding performance in a pageant show was spotted. He was transferred to the acting department of the talent training course and became a TV actor, where he played a few roles in Chinese television drama shows.
In the early 1990s, a Taiwanese motorcycle CM gave him instant fame and he burst onto the music scene with his now-famous song Loving You Forever (called 對你愛不完 in the Chinese and original release) and the dance moves for the song. In the next few years, his popularity reached fever-pitch and he was soon ranked alongside the most popular artists of the time.
Over the years, Kwok has also taken part in other mediums such as CMs and acting, especially with director-cinematographer Andrew Lau. Kwok has also done extensive public service and charity work, which is why he was amongst the winners of the Ten Most Outstanding Young Persons Award 2003.
In 2004, a string of concert dates earned Kwok a Hong Kong Dance Award presented by the Hong Kong Dance Alliance. Due to this success, Kwok toured again in 2005, receiving much praise.
At the Taiwan's forty-second Golden Horse Awards ceremony on 13 November 2005, Kwok won Best Leading Actor award for his role in the movie "Divergence". It was Kwok's first Golden Horse nomination and beat veteran Hong Kong star Tony Leung to win the honour.
Aaron won the Best Actor Award again at the forty-third Golden Horse Awards on 24 November 2006 for his role in the movie "After This Our Exile". He became the second actor in the history of the Golden Horse Awards to win the Best Actor Award year after year. Jackie Chan first acchieved this back in the 1990s.
