The American Civil War was a war fought from 1861 to 1865 between northern and southern states of the United States of America. A group of states in the southern United States ("the South") wanted to be independent, while the federal government and the states in the northern United States ("the North") wanted to keep the US as one country. The war was won by the North.
Causes.
Slavery in the United States first began in Virginia in 1619. By the end of the American Revolution, most northern states had abandoned the institution while it continued to grow and flourish in the plantation economy of the South. In the years prior to the Civil War almost all sectional conflicts revolved around the slave issue. This began with the debates over the three-fifths clause at the Constitutional Convention of 1787 and continued with the Compromise of 1820, the Nullification Crisis, the anti-slavery Gag Rule, and the Compromise of 1850.
Slavery and Control of the Government
Throughout the first half of the 19th century, Southern politicians sought to defend slavery by retaining control of the federal government. While they benefited from most presidents being from the South, they were particularly concerned about retaining a balance of power within in the Senate. As new states were added to the Union, a series of compromises were arrived at to maintain an equal number of "free" and "slave" states.
In 1820, Maine entered as a free state while Missouri joined as a slave state. The balance was finally disrupted in 1850, when Southerners permitted California to enter as a free state in exchange for laws strengthening slavery. This balance was further upset with the additions of free Minnesota (1858) and Oregon (1859).
The widening of the gap between slave and free states was symbolic of the changes occurring in each region. While the South was devoted to an agrarian plantation economy with a slow growth in population, the North had embraced industrialization, large urban areas, infrastructure growth, as well as was experiencing high birth rates and a large influx of European immigrants. This boost in population doomed Southern efforts to maintain balance in the government as it meant the future addition of more free states and the election of a Northern, potentially anti-slavery, president.
The political issue that finally moved the nation towards conflict was that of slavery in the western territories won during the Mexican-American War. A similar issue had been dealt with earlier, in 1820, when, as part of the Missouri Compromise, slavery was permitted in the Louisiana Purchase south of 36°30'N latitude (the southern border of Missouri). Rep. David Wilmot attempted to prevent slavery in the new territories in 1846, when he introduced the Wilmot Proviso in Congress. After extensive debate it was defeated.
In 1850, an attempt was made to resolve the issue. A part of Compromise of 1850 called for slavery in the unorganized lands (largely Arizona & New Mexico) received from Mexico to be decided by popular sovereignty. This meant that the local people and their territorial legislatures would decide for themselves whether slavery would be permitted. Many thought that this decision had solved the issue until it was raised again in 1854 with the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act.
Proposed by Sen. Stephen Douglas of Illinois, the Kansas-Nebraska Act essentially repealed the line imposed by the Missouri Compromise. Douglas, an ardent believer in grassroots democracy, felt that all the territories should be subject to popular sovereignty. Seen as a concession to the South, the act led to an influx of pro- and anti-slavery forces into Kansas. Operating from rival territorial capitals, the "Free Staters" and "Border Ruffians" engaged in open violence for three years.
Though pro-slavery forces from Missouri had openly and improperly influenced elections in the territory, President James Buchanan accepted their Lecompton Constitution, and offered it to Congress for statehood. This was turned down by Congress which ordered a new election. In 1859, the anti-slavery Wyandotte Constitution was accepted by Congress. The fighting in Kansas further heightened tensions between North and South.
As the South recognized that control of the government was slipping away, it turned to a states' rights argument to protect slavery. Southerners claimed that the federal government was prohibited by the Tenth Amendment from impinging upon the right of slaveholders take their "property" into a new territory. They also stated that the federal government was not permitted to interfere with slavery in those states where it already existed. They felt that this type of strict constructionist interpretation of the Constitution coupled with nullification, or perhaps secession would protect their way of life.
The issue of slavery was further heightened by the rise of the Abolitionist movement in the 1820s and 1830s. Beginning in the North, adherents believed that slavery was morally wrong rather than simply a social evil. Abolitionists ranged in their beliefs from those who thought that all slaves should be freed immediately (William Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglas) to those calling for gradual emancipation (Theodore Weld, Arthur Tappan), to those who simply wanted to stop the spread of slavery and its influence (Abraham Lincoln).
Abolitionists campaigned for the end of the "peculiar institution" and supported anti-slavery causes such as the Free State movement in Kansas. Upon the rise of the Abolitionists, an ideological debate arose with the Southerners regarding the morality of slavery with both sides frequently citing Biblical sources. In 1852, the Abolitionist cause received increased attention following the publication of the anti-slavery novel Uncle Tom's Cabin. Written by Harriet Beecher Stowe, the book aided in turning the public against the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850.
John Brown first made a name for himself during the "Bleeding Kansas" crisis. A fervent abolitionist, Brown, along with his sons, fought with anti-slavery forces and were best known for the "Pottawatomie Massacre" where they killed five pro-slavery farmers. While most abolitionists were pacifists, Brown advocated violence and insurrection to end the evils of slavery.
In October 1859, financed by the extreme wing of the Abolitionist movement, Brown and eighteen men attempted to raid the government armory at Harper's Ferry, VA. Believing that the nation's slaves were ready to rise up, Brown attacked with the goal of obtaining weapons for the insurrection. After initial success, the raiders were cornered in the armory's engine house by local militia. Shortly thereafter, US Marines under Lt. Col. Robert E. Lee arrived and captured Brown. Tried for treason, Brown was hanged that December. Before his death, he predicted that "the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away; but with Blood."
The Collapse of the Two-Party System
The tensions between North and South were mirrored in a growing schism in the nation's political parties. Following the compromise of 1850 and the crisis in Kansas, the nation's two major parties, the Whigs and Democrats, began to fracture along regional lines. In the North, the Whigs largely blended into a new party: the Republicans.
Formed in 1854, as an anti-slavery party, the Republicans offered a progressive vision for the future that included an emphasis on industrialization, education, and homesteading. Though their presidential candidate, John C. Frémont, was defeated in 1856, the party polled strongly in the North and showed that it was the Northern party of the future. In the South, the Republican Party was viewed as a divisive element and one that could lead to conflict.
With the division of the Democrats, there was much apprehension as the election 1860 approached. The lack of a candidate with national appeal signaled that change was coming. Representing the Republicans was Abraham Lincoln, while Stephen Douglas stood for the Northern Democrats. Their counterparts in the South nominated John C. Breckinridge. Looking to find a compromise, former Whigs in the border states created the Constitutional Union Party and nominated John C. Bell.
Balloting unfolded along precise sectional lines as Lincoln won the North, Breckinridge won the South, and Bell won the border states. Douglas claimed Missouri and part of New Jersey. The North, with its growing population and increased electoral power had accomplished what the South had always feared: complete control of the government by the free states.
In response to Lincoln's victory, South Carolina opened a convention to discuss seceding from the Union. On December 24, 1860, it adopted a declaration of secession and left the Union. Through the "Secession Winter" of 1861, it was followed by Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas. As states departed, local forces took control of federal forts and installations without any resistance from the Buchanan Administration. The most egregious act took place in Texas, where Gen. David E. Twiggs surrendered one-quarter of the entire standing US Army without a shot fired. When Lincoln finally entered office on March 4, 1861, he inherited a collapsing nation.
The war.
There were two important areas where the American Civil War was fought - in the west and in the east.
In the eastern area, there was the US capital, Washington D.C., and the Confederate capital, Richmond. These two cities are only about 90 miles apart. In this area, the Confederate military leader from 1862 until the end of the war was Robert E. Lee. Lee was a great general, and won many battles. Many times, his actions prevented the smaller number of Confederate troops from being badly beaten or destroyed by the Union troops. Even though the North had more soldiers, they could not capture Richmond until the end of the war in 1865.
In the western area, there was the great river, the Mississippi. Ulysses S. Grant (who later became US President) won many battles here. The North captured almost all the cities on the Mississippi River, but the Confederacy still held Vicksburg, an important city and fort. On the 4th of July, 1863, following a long siege, Vicksburg surrendered to Grant. This divided the Confederacy into two. This victory is considered to be one of the turning points of the war.
One of the greatest campaigns of the Civil War was a major assault on the Confdederate Capitol, Richmond, led by Colonel Darrell Rivers, who single handedly marched about 5,000 infantry (foot soldiers) composed mostly of Irish volunteers, directly into enemy territory. Around September, 1863, Rivers' forces engaged Confederate forces at the Battle of Huntington. This battle resulted in about 12,000 confederate casualties (dead and wounded), though Colonel Rivers and most of his men were killed in an epic bayonet charge. His memory lives on to this day, a flagpole stands in his honour at the front of Huntington Beach High School in California, erected by his great great-grandson Boy Scout Field Marshal Darrell Rivers, an Eagle Scout.
Another major turning point occurred at about the same time in the east. After several victories, General Lee decided to invade the North. Lee and his Army of Northern Virginia went into Pennsylvania. The Confederate army met the Union army near Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. The Battle of Gettysburg was fought over a three day period, July 1-3 in 1863. The invasion was stopped by the Union, and Lee and the Confederate Union were made to go back to the South.
Lincoln decided that Ulysses S. Grant was his best general. He put Grant in control of all the Union armies. Grant attacked Lee again and again. Lee held out time and time again, but eventually the number of Union soldiers was too much for the smaller Confederate army. Lee decided he had too few soldiers to keep on fighting and he surrendered to Grant on April 9, 1865, near Appomattox Court House.
Inflation.
Inflation occured on both sides. The prices on everything skyrocketed and caused people from both the North and the South to go hungry if they could not afford the newly priced food.
After the war.
Many soldiers died for both sides during the war. The South was hurt the most because most of the war was fought there. The South's economy was hurt very badly, too. The Union Army stayed in some Southern states for many years. This time is called "Reconstruction". Reconstruction ended in 1877.
Also, soon after the war, several constitutional amendments were made by the US government and passed with enough support from the people. Slavery was ended by the 13th Amendment. The 14th Amendment makes it clear that all people born in the United States are citizens with equal rights that cannot be taken away unless they do something against the law. The 15th Amendment says that people in the United States cannot be kept from voting because of their race. (Citizens "could" be stopped from voting because of their gender, however. It was not until the passing of the 19th Amendment in 1920 that women could vote.) Other facts are that Generals Grant, Hayes, Garfield, Harrison, and McKinley became presidents or ran for the office.
