The Apostles' Creed (Latin: "Symbolum Apostolorum"), sometimes titled Symbol of the Apostles, is an early statement of Christian belief, a creed or "symbol."
It is widely used by a number of Christian denominations for both liturgical and catechetical purposes, most visibly by liturgical Churches of Western tradition, including the Latin Rite of the Roman Catholic Church, Lutheranism, the Anglican Communion, and Western Orthodoxy. It is also used by evangelical Protestant denominations such as Presbyterians, Methodists, Congregationalists and many Baptists.
This creed seems to have been made as an argument against Gnosticism. Gnosticism was a heresy in the early days of the Church. This can be seen in almost every phrase. For example, the creed states that Christ was born and suffered and died on the cross. This seems to be a statement directly against the heretical teaching, which states that Christ only appeared to become man, and that he did not truly suffer and die, but only appeared as if he did. The Apostles' Creed, as well as other creeds, was made to be like an example of the apostles' teachings, and to defend the Gospel of Christ.
The creed is named Apostles' Creed because it is made of twelve articles. People believed every apostle
inspired the Holy Ghost after Pentecost wrote one article.
Because of its early origin, it does not address some issues defined in the later Nicene and other Christian Creeds. This makes it acceptable to many Arians and Unitarians.
Origin of the Creed.
Many hypotheses exist concerning the date and nature of the origin of the Apostles' Creed.
Many suppose it comes from "the Old Roman Symbol" of the 1st or 2nd century and was influenced later by the Nicene Creed (325/381).
For more information on the origin of the Apostles' Creed, see the in the "Catholic Encyclopedia".
Latin text.
"Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem, Creatorem caeli et terrae. Et in Iesum Christum, Filium Eius unicum, Dominum nostrum, qui conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto, natus ex Maria Virgine, passus sub Pontio Pilato, crucifixus, mortuus, et sepultus, descendit ad ínferos, tertia die resurrexit a mortuis, ascendit ad caelos, sedet ad dexteram Dei Patris omnipotentis, inde venturus est iudicare vivos et mortuos. Credo in Spiritum Sanctum, sanctam Ecclesiam catholicam, sanctorum communionem, remissionem peccatorum, carnis resurrectionem, vitam aeternam. Amen."
The Church of England.
In the Church of England there are currently two authorized forms of the creed: that of the "Book of Common Prayer" (1662) and that of "Common Worship" (2000).
The United Methodist Church.
The United Methodists commonly incorporate the Apostles' Creed into their worship services. It is special because it does not have the line "he descended into hell", but is otherwise very similar to the Book of Common Prayer version. The 1989 Hymnal has both the traditional version and the ecumenical version, which includes "he descended to the dead."
The "United Methodist Hymnal" also contains (at #882) what it terms the "Ecumenical Version" of this creed -- a version which is identical to that found in the Episcopal Church's current "Book of Common Prayer". This form of the Apostles' Creed can be found incorporated into the Eucharistic and Baptismal Liturgies in the Hymnal and in "The United Methodist Book of Worship", and hence it is growing in popularity and use.
