Apple is an American company that makes computer hardware, computer software, and portable devices like mobile telephones and music players. Apple call their computers "Macintoshes". Their popular line of mobile music players are called "iPod"s and a mobile phone they have released is called the "iPhone". Apple sell their products all around the world.
Unlike most personal computer companies, which sell products made to run Microsoft Windows or Linux, Apple's computer hardware runs software designed to only run on their products, usually with an operating system they have written for their products called Mac OS X. Some people think this way of making software and hardware together make Apple products easier to use and more reliable.
1970s.
Apple was created in 1976 by Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak. Before they made the company, they sold "blue boxes", which had telephone buttons on them. People could use them to make telephone calls from pay phones without paying any money. The company's first product is now called the Apple I computer. They were almost ready to sell it, but a problem happened. Steve Wozniak was working for the computer company Hewlett-Packard, and the papers that said he could work there said he had to give everything he invented to the company before he could do what he wanted to do with it. He showed the first Apple I to the boss at Hewlett-Packard, but they did not want his computer. Wozniak was free to do what he wanted to do with the Apple I. It was sold in 1976. In 1977 they made their second computer, called the Apple II.
iPod.
One of the most popular products by Apple are iPods. All iPods with a screen can play music, display pictures, and play video. There are several different types of iPods.
The red iPod shuffle and iPod nano models are part of the "(PRODUCT) RED" program. This means that ten dollars from each purchase of these iPods goes to help fight AIDS in Africa. Only Apple sell (PRODUCT) RED iPods.
Computers.
Most computer users in the world use Microsoft Windows, the rival to Mac OS X. About 8% of computer users use Apple's Macintosh computers. It is not possible to run Apple's Mac OS X on a Windows computer. However, it is possible to run Windows on modern Macintosh computers. Even though Apple makes their computers to run Mac OS X, they also make software that allows you to install Windows. This software is called Boot Camp. Apple's new operating system, Mac OS X 10.5 (also called Leopard), comes with this software.
iPhone.
Apple's newest product that is a Phone, iPod, and more with a touch screen. The newest iPhone released uses 3G (which is quicker than normal mobile phone connections) to surf the web. The iPhones come in 8GB and 16GB types. The iPhone 3G comes in black and white (16GB version only.) The new price for the iPhone 3G 8GB is $199 and 16GB is $299. This new version was released on July 11, 2008. The price in the UK where released for O2 Pay and Go on 2nd September 2008. The price of the 8GB version is £350 and the 16GB is £399 - nearly twice as much as the US version. The UK version was released on the 16th September 2008.
