Mainland Australia has three official time zones. The full names of the time zones are usually shortened by dropping the "Australian". Most Australian external territories are in different time zones. Many parts of Australia have daylight saving time.
History.
The three official standard time zones were set up in in February 1895.
Originally South Australia was nine hours ahead of Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) but in May 1899 they added another thirty minutes to that. Some people have disliked having this non-whole number of hours difference. In 1986 and 1994 they tried to take the thirty minutes away again or add another thirty minutes but they failed.
When the Australian Capital Territory separated from New South Wales they kept using Eastern Standard Time. When the Northern Territory separated from South Australia they kept using Central Standard Time.
Changes.
There have been some other changes.
Outside territories.
Australia's many outside territories follow their own time zones. None follow daylight saving time.
Daylight saving time.
South Australia, New South Wales, the Australian Capital Territory, Victoria and Tasmania use daylight saving time every year. In most of these regions daylight saving time begins on the last Sunday in October at 2:00 am local standard time, and end on the last Sunday in March at 3:00 am local daylight saving time. Tasmania begins daylight saving time earlier, on the first Sunday in October at 2:00 am local standard time. The starting and finishing times can also be changed when there are special events, such as the Olympic and Commonwealth Games, in Australia.
The Northern Territory doesn't have daylight saving time. Queensland doesn't have daylight savings time either. Many people who live in the south east corner of Queensland would like to have. But many people who live in the rural towns and farming regions of Queensland are against it.
In Western Australia they have voted on daylight saving time three times: in 1975, 1984 and 1992. Each time people voted "No". Western Australia is trying daylight saving time again from spring 2006 until autumn 2009. Then they are going to vote again.
