"Aladdin" is an animated movie made by Walt Disney Pictures. It is based on the fairy tale of the same name.
The story.
The movie opens on Arabian kingdom named Agrabah where a scandal happens: the Sultan wants married his daughter Jasmine but she refuses all suiters and escape from the palace. On the marketplace, she meets a poor boy of the streets named Aladdin. Meanwhile, at the palace's high tower, the evil wizard Jafar discoveries that Aladdin is the man that can help him to find a magic lamp. Jafar sends the royals guards to rest Aladdin. On the dungeon, Jafar tells Aladdin to enter the Cave of Wonders to get a lamp.
Aladdin and his pet monkey Abu enter on the cave where they found mountains of gold, jewels and a magic carpet. Unfortunately, Abu touch on the forbidden treasure and the cave destroy itself. Aladdin clean the lamp and accidentally do the genie go out. Aladdin's first wish is to be a prince for he can marry with the princess. Wear royals clothes, Aladdin go to the palace where he announced to the Sultan that he want marry the princess.
That night, Aladdin and Jasmine fly on the magic carpet on the Agrabah's sky and they fall in love. At the next morning, Jasmine announced to all kingdom that she had chosen a suiter. Unfortunately, Jafar robs the lamp and uses his first wish to become the sultan. The new evil sultan shows to Jasmine who is Aladdin and sends him to the end of the Earth. On the palace's interior, Jafar become Jasmine and Sultan his slaves and transport the royal treasure to the throne room. The evil wizard suggest to Jasmine a place has his queen but she refuses.
Jasmine sees Aladdin on the door and she pretends fall in love with Jafar. The plan fall because Jafar sees Aladdin on Jasmine's tiara and attacks him. When Jafar says that he is the "world's powerful man", Aladdin says that genie is more powerful than him. Jafar uses his last wish to become an powerful genie. Like Aladdin planed, Jafar is rest on a lamp and Agrabah becomes free. Aladdin wishes that genie becomes free, like he promess. The first thing that the Sultan made when he back to be Sultan has change the law: Jasmine can marry Aladdin.
