Association football is a sport played between two teams. Globally it is usually called football, but in some countries, such as the United States and Canada, it is called soccer. In Japan, New Zealand, South Africa, Australia and Republic of Ireland, both words are commonly used.
In each team there are 11 players. 10 of them play on the field and one is the goalkeeper. The game is played by kicking a ball into the opponent's goal. A match has 90 minutes play, with a break of about 15 minutes in the middle.
Competitions.
There are many competitions for football, for both football clubs and countries. Football clubs usually play other teams in their own country, with a few exceptions. Cardiff City F.C. from Wales for example, play in the English leagues and in the English FA Cup.
Groups such as UEFA and FIFA organise international competitions between clubs and countries. Clubs play in competitions such as UEFA Champions League or UEFA Cup, and countries play for the World Cup or a continental trophy such as the European Championship.
The FIFA World Cup takes place every four years between national teams, and is the world's most popular sporting event, even more popular than the Olympic Games. In football, a championship is usually called a "Cup". For example, the FIFA World Cup or the FA Cup.
Who plays football.
Football is the world's most popular sport. It is played in more countries than any other game. In fact, FIFA (the Federation Internationale de Football Association) has more members than the United Nations. It is played by both males and females, but more commonly by males.
In Europe, the main competitions to compete to be the best in Europe are the Champions League for the top teams from the top leagues in each country in Europe. Then there is the UEFA cup which is the next best teams from eaches of the top leagues competing.
The most successful club in the world is Rangers F.C. from Scotland, having won more major titles than any other team in the world. They have won the country's league 51 times, a world record.
