Arthur Miller (October 17, 1915 – February 10, 2005) was a famous American playwright, a person who writes plays. His most famous plays are "All My Sons", "Death of a Salesman" and "The Crucible". He also wrote for the movie "The Misfits" while he was married to Marilyn Monroe. She acted in this movie.
Early life.
Arthur Miller's family was a rich family from New York. During the Great Depression in the 1930s, the family lost all their money. Because Miller wanted to go to university, he had to work in a warehouse. He studied economics and history at the University of Michigan, and also learnt how to write plays. He married Mary Slattery in 1940.
Plays.
In 1944, Miller had his first play in a theatre on Broadway in New York, called "The Man Who Had All the Luck". Unfortunately, not many people liked it so this play was stopped after one week.
However, three years later, his play "All My Sons" became very popular. This play won the Pulitzer Prize for drama.
In 1949, he wrote "Death of a Salesman", a story about the American Dream.
In 1953, he wrote "The Crucible", a story about the Salem Witch Trials. He wrote this because of the McCarthyism of the 1950s, the fear that communism would take over America. A few years later, Miller was a accused of being a communist himself. He had to answer questions from the House Un-American Activities Committee, a group that Senator Joseph McCarthy made.
Personal life.
In 1956, Miller divorced Mary Slattery so he could married the actress Marilyn Monroe. During this marriage, he wrote for the movie "The Misfits". Monroe acted in this movie. After five years of marriage, Monroe divorced him.
The following year, Miller married again. The photographer Inge Morath was his third wife, and they were together until she died in 2002. They had two children.
His son, Daniel, was born with Down Syndrome. Miller put him in a hospital and did not want to see him again. His daughter, Rebecca, married actor Daniel Day-Lewis, who asked Miller several times to contact his hospitalised son.
Arthur Miller died in Roxbury, Connecticut in 2005.
