Aung San Suu Kyi (Burmese language: အောင္‌ဆန္‌းစုက္ရည or); born June 19, 1945 in Yangon, Burma is a woman who tries to bring democracy to her country. She is the leader of the National League for Democracy in Burma, and a famous prisoner. She never uses violence in to make Burma democratic.
Suu Kyi won the Rafto Prize and the Sakharov Prize in 1990 and the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. In 1992, she was awarded the Jawaharlal Nehru peace prize by India for her trying to be peaceful.
In the 1990 general election in Burma, Suu Kyi's political party won, so she should have become Prime Minister of Burma. The military did not let her party, the National League for Democracy join the government. They arrested her instead, and forced her to stay in her house and not have any visitors. They have done this many times, and she has been forced to stay in her house for 12 years.
She is sometimes called "Daw Aung San Suu Kyi"; Daw is not part of her name, but a title for older women. This name shows respect for her.
Personal life.
Aung San Suu Kyi was the third child in her family. Her name "Aung San" comes from her father, who is also named Aung San; "Kyi" comes from her mother; and "Suu" comes from her grandmother.
Her father helped to make Burma independent from the United Kingdom in 1947. He was killed in the same year. She grew up with her mother, Khin Kyi, and two brothers, Aung San Lin and Aung San Oo in Yangon. Her favourite brother Aung San Lin drowned in a pool accident when Suu Kyi was eight. Her other brother lives in San Diego, California and is an American citizen.
Suu Kyi went to Catholic schools for much of her childhood in Burma. She learned English in school.
Khin Kyi became famous as a politician. She was became the Burmese ambassador to India in 1960. Aung San Suu Kyi went to college in India at the Lady Shri Ram College for Women in New Delhi.
She continued her education at St Hugh's College, Oxford, and learned about philosophy, politics, and economics. She also went to the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London in the 1980s.
She also worked for the government. In 1972, Aung San Suu Kyi married Michael Aris, a professor of Tibetan culture who lived in Bhutan. In 1973, she gave birth to her first son, Alexander, in London; and in 1977 she had her second son, Kim.
Political beginnings.
Aung San Suu Kyi returned to Burma in 1988 to take care of her sick mother. That year, the long-time leader of the socialist ruling party, General Ne Win, stopped being a politician. Many Burmese people wanted a democracy after the military ruled the country for several years.
She admired Mohandas Gandhi's philosophy of non-violence. She was also inspired by Buddhism.. Aung San Suu Kyi tried to work for democracy and helped make the National League for Democracy on September 27, 1988.
She was offered freedom if she left the country, but she refused.
Notes.
This article is based on the English Wikipedia article on Aung San Suu Kyi
