Aristotle (Greek Αριστοτέλης Aristotelēs) (born 384 BC at Stagira, in Macedonia, Greece; died March 7, 323 BC at Chalicis, Euboea, Greece) was a Greek philosopher. Many people think that, together with Plato, he is one of the most important philosophers in Western ways of thinking. It is said that Aristotle wrote around 150 philosophical books. Aristotle was the boyhood tutor of Alexander the Great, who later sent him plants and animals from parts of his new empire.
Introduction.
Aristotle's father Nicomachus, was the doctor of king Amyntas of Macedonia. From his eighteenth to his thirty-seventh year, Aristotle lived in Athens, as a metic and student of Plato.
The three greatest ancient Greek philosophers were Aristotle, Plato, and Socrates. Socrates taught Plato, then Plato taught Aristotle. These three thinkers turned early Greek philosophy into the beginnings of Western philosophy the way it is today. Aristotle taught Alexander the Great, who later conquered the entire Middle East.
Plato's main ideas were that knowledge from the senses was always confused and not pure. True knowledge can be gotten from the thinking soul that turns away from the world. Only the soul can have knowledge of "Forms", the real way things are. The world is only a copy of these "Forms" and is not perfect.
Aristotle thought differently. He thought that knowledge from the senses was more important. These thoughts became the ideas of the scientific method after hundreds of years. Most of the things Aristotle wrote that we still have today are notes from his speaking and teaching. Some of his important writings are "Physics", "Metaphysics", "(Nicomachean) Ethics", "Politics", "De Anima (On the Soul)", and "Poetics".
He also had problems with the atomic theory. He did not believe in Democritus' theories about the atomic theory. He believed that all matter was continuous whereas Democritus stated the all matter was made up of tiny indivisible things called "atoms". Democritus was proved right by physicist John Dalton in 1804.
Logic.
Aristotle also wrote about Logic. Aristotle is the father of logic. Logic is a type of thought that allows us to decide whether an idea is true or false. Until recently, Aristotle's ideas on logic had the most influence across the world.
History and influence of Aristotle's work.
The history of the work of Aristotle from the time he was born until the 1st century BC is not well known. Legends say that Aristotle's collection of writings was left to Theophrastus. Theophrastus was Aristotle's successor. Theophrastus hid the things Aristotle wrote to keep them from being taken away or destroyed. They were found again in the year 70 BC.
