Andalusia or Andalucía, in southern Spain, is one of 17 regions of Spain called Autonomous communities of Spain. It is the first in population among the Autonomous communities and the second in area. With 7,975,672 people and eight provinces it is a well-known region in Europe. The capital is Seville, with 705,000 inhabitants and 1,350,000 in the metropolitan area. Another big city is Malaga, with 560,000 inhabitants and 1,075,000 in the metropolitan area. Other famous Andalusian cities are Cordoba, Granada, Almeria, Cadiz, Jaen, Huelva, Jerez, and Marbella. The most important river is the Guadalquivir and the highest mountain in Andalusia and in the Iberian Peninsula is the Mulhacen
The name Andalusia is the modern version of the name Al-Andalus which goes back to the Middle Ages. During that period, northern Iberian Peninsula was controlled by Christian kings and the southern Iberian Peninsula was controlled by Muslims. In 711 CE, the Muslims invaded the Iberian Peninsula, then controlled by Christians of Visigothic origin. By 719 the Muslims conquered all of the peninsula except for a small area in the northern Pyrenees Mountains. The Muslims used the name Al-Andalus for all of the territory of the Iberian Peninsula under their control. Christians in the north waged war for more than seven centuries against the Muslims, gradually taking over more and more of the southern areas. This process of war is called the reconquista, Spanish for reconquest. In the year 1492, King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain retook the last stronghold in the southern area at Granada. In that same year, the Muslims and Jews were forced to leave Spain.
The name Andalusia has been applied to the southern region of Spain, because that area was the center of the Muslim controlled area and the influence of their architecture and other aspects of their culture can still be seen there.
The Andalusian Party (Partido Andalucista) is a nationalist centre-left political party from Andalusia (Spain), with an important presence in provinces such as Cádiz and Seville although in the past they have stood in other provinces and even won seats in Barcelona to the Catalan Regional Assembly. [1]
The party was founded as the Socialist Alliance of Andalusia (Alianza Socialista de Andalucía) in 1971. In 1976 it took the name Andalusian Socialist Party (Partido Socialista de Andalucía). In 1979 the name was changed to Andalusian Socialist Party - Andalusian Party (PSA-Partido Andaluz). The current party name was adopted in 1984. Its current secretary-general is Julián Álvarez, ex-mayor of Écija, in Seville.
A splinter group, led by former leader Pedro Pacheco, was formed in 2001 under the name Socialist Party of Andalusia (Partido Socialista de Andalucía).
References.
Joseph O'Callaghan, A History of Medieval Spain, 1975, Cornell University Press.
