Amber Nicole Benson(b. January 8, 1977) is an American actress, writer, film director, and film producer. She is best known for her role as "Tara Maclay", on the TV series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer".
Early life.
Benson was born in Birmingham, Alabama. She had a mixed Christian and Jewish upbringing.
Feature and animation movies.
While still working on "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", Benson wrote, directed, produced, edited, and acted in a movie called "Chance" (2002). The movie also featured her "Buffy" co-star James Marsters. After her time on Buffy, Benson began working on a series of animated movies for the BBC with co-creator Christopher Golden and animation company Cosgrove Hall. "Ghosts of Albion: Legacy" (2003) and its sequels are available on the BBC Cult website (http://www.bbc.co.uk/cult/ghosts/legacy/). In 2006, Benson released her second movie "Lovers, Liars and Lunatics" through her own production company, Benson Entertainment. The movie was shot on movie and was partly payed for by the sale of special action figures of her character Tara from the "Buffy" episode "Triangle".
Writing career: novels and comics.
Benson also writes novels and comic books. She usually writes these with Christopher Golden. In 2003, Benson worked with Golden, Terry Moore, and Eric Powell of Dark Horse Comics to create the ' comic book titled "WannaBlessedBe". During the same year, she worked with Christopher Golden and AJ (Ajit Jothikaumar) of Dark Horse Comics to create the "Buffy the Vampire Slayer: Willow and Tara" comic books titled "Wilderness #1" and "Wilderness #2". In 2005, Benson worked with artist Jamie McKelvie on a short story for the Image Comics collection "Four Letter Worlds". In 2006, Benson worked with artist Ben Templesmith on "Demon Father John’s Pinwheel Blues" published by IDW. Benson and Golden have also worked together on two supernatural thrillers: "Ghosts of Albion: Accursed" and "Ghosts of Albion: Witchery". These books follow the stories of Tamara and William Swift, characters from the BBC computer animated web movie "Ghosts of Albion: Legacy". In September of 2007, Benson signed a three-book deal with Penguin Books. The first book is believed to be titled "Death's Daughter".
Career: miscellaneous.
In 2003, she worked with director James Kerwin to produce her play, "Albert Hall", in Hollywood.
Benson sang in the "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" musical episode "Once More, With Feeling". She sang on the songs "I've Got a Theory / Bunnies / If We're Together", "Under Your Spell" (her solo), "Walk Through the Fire", "Standing/Under Your Spell (Reprise)" and "Where Do We Go From Here?" She also sang "Toucha Toucha Touch Me" (aka "Creature of the Night") at VH-1's celebrity karaoke tribute to The Rocky Horror Picture Show.
Personal life.
On the November 11, 2000 episode of the radioshow "Loveline", Amber (at age 23) said that she did not have a driver's license, that her mother drove her to the studio. She also said that she was at the time still a virgin. As of 2007, Benson resides in Los Angeles, California. And she is a vegetarian.
