The army is the part of a country's military that fights on the ground. People in the army are called soldiers. Many modern armies have vehicles such as tanks, airplanes, and helicopters to help soldiers fight on the ground.
A soldier may be a volunteer (someone who joins something by himself), or he may be drafted (forced by the government to join the army). Forcing men to join the army is called "conscription" or "draft". Voluntary armies tend to be small by numbers, but high in morale and quality. Drafted armies are large, but often lacking in morale and in quality: it may be very difficult to force someone to risk his life against his will. Often drafted armies use death penalty to ensure the soldiers will fight.
A soldier does many things, from shooting enemies, to using binoculars to find out where enemies are. They are used to defend their country, or attack another country's army. It is difficult, and a soldier must be in good shape, both physically and mentally. They almost always move together, and that way the team can do more things, in a safer way. They may be assigned to certain places to guard, or they may be told to search a place, or even attack it. That is up to their commander. Every soldier answers to someone else, so that way, everything is organized.
Gear.
A soldier is supplied with weapons, such as guns, knives, and other simple gear for surviving in the battlefield, such as food, water, clothes, and tents. They must keep good care of the items.
American military.
Before a soldier joins the army, he must qualify to be in it first. The person is put through tests, so that the army will know if the recruit can do it or not. This is sometimes called 'boot camp'. He must complete mental tests, and physical tests. It depends on where he is testing that will tell him how hard it will be. He will also take tests to determine what job he will do in the military. For instance, he may work with computers or be a cook for the soldiers, or he may be very good with a rifle and be a sniper.
