Amber Adriana Helena Rives (born April 19, 1988), better known as Amber Rives, is an American model/songwriter.
Early life and career.
Amber Rives was born in Seville, Spain, to a Spanish, Puerto Rican mother and an Irish father of Cuban descent. When Amber was 6 her family moved to Ireland. At the age of 11, she was spotted by a talent scout from Irene Marie Models in Miami, Florida while on holiday and was signed straight away. She did not formally begin modeling until age 15.
Music.
Rives has written songs for Usher,including recent #1 hit "Love In This Club",Mario,including "Crying Out For Me" and "Music For Love",Leona Lewis,including "Bleeding Love" and "Better In Time",Rihanna,including #1 single "Umbrella" featuring Jay-Z,Chris Brown,including "With You" and "Forever",Christina Milian "Us Against The World".
She is currently working on new projects with Mario,Beyoncé,Robin Thicke,Christina Milian,Ciara,J Holiday,The Pussycatdolls,R Kelly,Michael Jackson and Omarion.
Songwriting Summer 2008.
Rives is responsible for many of the hits at the top of the charts at the moment including Jordin Sparks ft.Chris Brown,"No Air",Keyshia Cole "Heaven Sent",LL Cool J ft.The Dream "Baby",Leona Lewis "Forgive Me",Mariah Carey ft.TI "Loving You Long Time",Nas ft.Keri Hilson "Hero",Ne-Yo "Closer" and "Miss Independent",Nelly ft.Akon and Ashanti "Body On Me",The PussyCatDolls ft.R Kelly "Out Of This Club",Rihanna "Take A Bow" and "Disturbia",Robin Thicke "Magic",Solange Knowles "I Decided",New Kids On The Block ft.Ne-Yo "Single" and Usher "Moving Mountains" and "Trading Places".
Rives has also been involved in new material leaked from upcoming albums from major R'n'B stars,these include:Beyoncé "Beautiful Nightmare",Akon ft.Michael Jackson "Hold My Hand",The Dream ft.Rihanna "Livin' A Lie" and Mario "Promise Land".
Personal Life.
Rives has been romantically linked with R&B superstar Mario several times.They were recently seen leaving Jay-Z's 40/40 club in New York City which sparked rumors that they are back together after dating briefly in 2007.However during an interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno,the supermodel denied that the pair are back together,and stated that they are simply "very good friends".
She is currently living with fellow fashion model and close friend Tyra Banks in Manhattan,New York City.
