Avril Ramona Lavigne Whibley (born September 27, 1984) is a Canadian singer and songwriter. At age 17, she released her first album called "Let Go" in 2002. The other two albums she had released are "Under My Skin" in 2004 and "The Best Damn Thing" in 2007. In 2004, she won a World Music Award for favorite pop/rock artist. She performed the track "Sponge Bob" for "The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie". Avril has French-Canadian grandparents, however, Avril does not speak French. Her first name, Avril, means "April" in French. Her last name, Lavigne, means "The vine" or "The vineyard" in French.
Life.
Avril was born in Ontario on September 27, 1984. She was found in a bookstore while singing songs. She started street performing. Her most famous single currently is "Girlfriend".
In February 2004, she began dating Canadian singer, Deryck Whibley, the lead singer/guitarist of pop punk band Sum 41. On June 27, 2005, Lavigne and Whibley became engaged. Whibley asked Lavigne to marry him by surprising her with a trip to Venice, Italy.
The couple married in Roman Catholic ceremony that began at 5 p.m., July 15, 2006 at a private estate in Montecito, California. Lavigne wore a Vera Wang gown and carried pearl white Australian roses. She was walked down the aisle by her father. The people who came were Steve Jocz and Cone McCaslin from Sum 41, Matthew Lavigne (Avril's older brother), and Sum 41's close friend Robb Dipple. Avril's younger sister Michelle Lavigne was one of Avril's bridesmaids. She likes the colours hot pink and black. The song "Iris" by the Goo Goo Dolls was played as their wedding song. When asked if they were ready for children they said "not right now, but somewhere down the road."
Before Let Go.
In 1999, Avril won a competition to sing with Shania Twain in Ottawa, Canada. She debuted when a recording artist saw her singing country songs in a book store.
Let Go.
In June 2002, Avril released her first album, "Let Go". It got to number one in Canada, Australia and the United Kingdom, and number two in the United States. Two months later, she won an award for the music video "Complicated", the first single off "Let Go". She made her breakthrough with "Complicated", "Sk8er Boi" then "Don't Tell Me" and the first two singles off "Let Go" both entered the top 10 in the music charts. The next February, she was nominatedd for 5 Grammy Awards, but won none.
Under My Skin.
In May 2004, her second album, "Under My Skin" was released. The next night, on "Total Request Live", she gave the middle finger to journalists after being asked for her opinions of the media, later followed by other times where she was rude and violent. Lavigne and Matthew Gerard also wrote the song "Breakaway", which became a hit for Kelly Clarkson. Lavigne also went on a tour to promote "Under My Skin" called "Live and By Surprise". The place where she was going to play was not announced until a couple days before the show. She also went on tour in 2005.
The Best Damn Thing.
In April 2007, her third album, "The Best Damn Thing" was released. The album was the first to carry the parental advisory sticker due to repeated use of swear words. Avril described the album as "fast, fun, young, bratty, aggressive, confident, cocky in a playful way... all the good stuff." "Girlfriend", the first single from the album, got to number one in seven countries. She was sued because the band The Rubinos had a song called "I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend." Avril sang in "Girlfriend": "I want to be your girlfriend," which is different to and saying "I want to" not "I wanna." She then went on a world tour, known as "The Best Damn Tour".
Music airings.
Lavigne used to be a common favourite for public radio shows. When her songs started getting too profane they stopped airing it completely sometimes, such as Radio Disney. "My Happy Ending" contained the word "shit", though it still aired because the word was edited into "stuff". "Girlfriend", a rather popular song only appeared on YouTube and her album because it contained the words "motherfucking", "hell", and "damn". Many other songs were either edited or never released on the radio.
