American Football (sometimes called just football) is a team sport played by two teams of people with 11 players on each side. It is played with a ball that is pointed at both ends. Points are scored by one team getting the ball into the end zone of the other team.
Gameplay.
This ball is also called a football. The sport is played on a grass field, about 120 yards long and about 53 yards wide. The players wear protective equipment, including a helmet with facemask, shoulder pads, thigh pads, and often a mouth guard. At both ends of the field there are end zones. A team has four chances to advance the ball 10 yards while the opposing team tries to stop it. Certain players advance the ball by carrying or throwing it. Teams can score by advancing the ball to the other team's end zone or by kicking the ball through a goalpost. American football is carefully regulated by time and rules, which are enforced by officials, who also determine when a team scores. The main leagues that play American Football are the National Football League, and the National Collegiate Athletic Association, which plays college football.
Field.
American football is played on a field 120 yards long by 53 yards wide. It is divided on 20 lines drawing every 5 yards. At the ends of the field there the scoring area called the end zone.
Exhibition season.
Exhibition season (better known as Pre-Season) is in August. In the exhibition season, the teams get ready for the regular season by having training. Teams have practices to help the team get better and see who will make the team. All of the teams play 4 games before the regular season starts, and the games do not change what team gets to the post season. Because of it, teams do not use their best players much, and use the games as more practice.
Regular season.
It's a season with 32 teams.
The season lasts 17 weeks. Each team play 16 games and has one week off. This week of rest is called a "bye week".
NFL play-off.
The NFL play-off is a tournament. Indeed the NFL (National Football League) is divided since 1970 in two conference: the National Football Conference and the American Football Conference. Each of them are divided in 4 four divisions: North, South, West and East. Each division includes four teams.
At the end of the season, NFC's champion and AFC's champion play the NFL's final game, the Super Bowl which is the great American event. The event is often treated as a National holiday as many stores close for the event. The day of the event is commonly known nation wide as Super Bowl Sunday.
