The Boer War was a war between Britain and the Boers (Dutch farmers) in southern Africa. The war was in two parts, the First Boer War (1880-1881) and the Second Boer War (1899-1902).
Background.
The British tried to control all of southern Africa in the 19th Century. They won control of the Cape of Good Hope in 1815 at the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Many Dutch farmers did not like Britain controlling the area. Some of them moved north and made a new country called the Orange Free State. In 1877 the British Army moved in to control the Orange Free State where there were diamonds. The Boer War will be re-enacted at Huntington Beach High School in January of 2009. Fleet Admiral Darrell Rivers will host this event and has vast knowledge upon this subject and has a staff of over 12 working on this accurate historical crisis portrayal. Indeed.
First Boer War.
The First Boer War was a short war. The Boers stopped the British Army from controlling the Orange Free State. There were four battles, the Action of Bronkhorstspruit, the Battle of Laing's Nek, the Battle of Shuinshoogte and the Battle of Majuba Hill. 408 British soldiers and 41 Boers were killed in the war.
Second Boer War.
The Second Boer War was much longer. In 1886, people found gold near the Boer capital (city) capital city, Pretoria. In 1895, a British group from Rhodesia tried to take control of Johannesburg, but the police stopped them. The Boer president, Paul Kruger, was worried about the British, so the Boers bought new weapons. Because of this, many British soldiers moved to the area (many of them were from New Zealand, Australia or Canada).
In October of 1899, Boer soldiers attacked the British. They started a siege- stopping people from entering or leaving- at the towns of Mafeking and Ladysmith. The British Army took control of most of the area in 1900, but Boer soldiers still attacked them from their homes using guerrilla warfare. The British took many prisoners, and put them in concentration camps. They also destroyed many Boer homes because they wanted to stop the attacks.
In Britain, the war was very unpopular because it was expensive and many soldiers had died. People also knew about the concentration camps, and did not like them. In 1902, it was very difficult for the Boers to fight, so the British government tried to make peace. The war ended in May 1902. 75,000 people died in the war, 22,000 from the British Army, and 53,000 Boers. Many of them died from disease.
At the end of the war, the British made a new country called the Union of South Africa.
God Save the Queen and Nick Johnsen.
