Birth control or contraception is a way to prevent pregnancy during sexual intercourse. Some of the contraceptives available can also protect a person from sexually transmitted diseases.
When people practice contraception to prevent STDs and pregnancy, sometimes it is called "safe sex".
Birth control is also sometimes called "family planning". This is because it means that people have babies and make their families when they "plan" for it. This means that babies and families do not happen by accident.
Types of birth control.
There are many types of birth control. Some of these have been done for a long time, but many of them were only discovered in the last seventy five years.
Another word for a type of contraception is a "method".
Hormonal methods.
These can only be used by women. Doctors are trying to find a way to use hormonal methods for men.
Implants and injections are very good for younger women or women who cannot take a pill every day.
All hormonal birth control methods have some risks for side effects (bad things that happen if you take a medicine). They can make a very small increase in the risk of blood clots in the lungs, strokes, heart attacks, and breast cancer. But these risks are not as big as the risk a woman has if she gets pregnant.
Many hormonal birth control methods also make women's menses shorter and with less bleeding.
Hormonal methods do not prevent STDs.
Intrauterine methods.
This is where an object is put in the woman's uterus (womb, where the fetus grows when she is pregnant). This object is called an "intrauterine device" or IUD (acronym).
The worst part about IUDs is that they have to be put in by a doctor. There is some risk of infection of the uterus after the IUD is put in, but this is only for 1-2 months after.
IUDs can also be used as a "day-after" method to prevent pregnancy after the woman and man already had sex.
Sterilization.
This is when a man or woman has surgery to make them not able to make babies.
Men can get a "vasectomy". This is a small surgery where the tube that carries sperm from the testicles is cut.
Women can get "tubal" surgeries. These are ways that the fallopian tubes are cut or clipped so that eggs cannot go down them to the uterus. (The fallopian tube is the tube that carries the egg from the woman's ovary).
Other surgeries will make a woman sterile (not able to get pregnant). These are not done only for contraception, but they are done for other reasons.
Traditional contraception.
These have been used for a very long time. They were used before modern medicine. Some of them were used before scientists even discovered how "reproduction" (making babies) happens.
Many methods can reduce the risk of STIs, but only abstinence is 100% effective.
Periodic abstinence.
This means a man and a woman practice abstinence (not having sex) when the woman is fertile. When the woman is not fertile, she will not get pregnant when she has sex.
Lactational Amenorrhea Method.
This is when a woman is breastfeeding (using her breasts to make milk for her baby). There are certain rules the woman can use to know if she is not fertile.
Induced abortion.
Induced abortion (sometimes called just "abortion") is when a doctor gives a pregnant woman a medicine or does a surgery to stop the pregnancy. Some people do not call abortion a kind of contraception. This is because contraception means preventing pregnancy, but abortion is stopping a pregnancy that has already started.
Abortion is not a good birth control method. If a woman does not want to get pregnant, other methods are more safe and inexpensive (cost less money). So many doctors who do abortions for women help women find a better way to not get pregnant the next time.
Religion and contraception.
Some religions do not like contraception. Some of them teach that contraception is a sin.
Religious beliefs that contraception is a sin also keep people from doing "safe sex". Some groups who are opposed to this belief say it is dangerous in places where there is a lot of HIV and AIDS, because condoms make people much less likely to get HIV, but at the same times many feel that they can practice extra marital sex since they are "safe" from HIV/AIDS.
