Buddhism teaches people how to reduce their suffering by understanding themselves better. Some see it as a religion, other people think it is a philosophy and for others, Buddhism is a way of finding reality. The teachings of Gautama Buddha - a man who lived between about 563 and 483 BC - tell us how to live a good life. The Buddha was a rich prince. He gave up everything to work out how best to live. His teachings started in India and slowly spread, after his death, through most of Asia, to Central Asia, Tibet, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia, and the East Asian countries of China, Mongolia, Korea, and Japan and has now spread to the West.
Background.
The Buddha's teachings are about suffering and how to overcome it. Overcoming suffering allows a person to be truly happy. Buddha taught that if people make good decisions they would be happy and have peace of mind. Buddha taught that life is imperfect and that we will suffer (Dukkha). He taught that we suffer because of desire, anger and stupidity, and he showed that we could end our suffering by letting go of desires and overcoming anger and stupidity. The complete letting go of these negative influences is called Nirvana, meaning "to extinguish", like putting out the flame of a candle. The end of suffering, when one is fully awake (put an end to one's own ignorance) and has let go of all desire and anger, is also called Enlightenment. In Buddhism Enlightenment and Nirvana mean the same thing.
Buddhism teaches non-harm and "moderation" or balance, not going too far one way or the other. Buddhists often meditate, or think deeply, while sitting in a special or specific way. They often chant and meditate while walking. Buddhists sometimes do these things to understand the human heart and mind. Sometimes they do these things to understand the way the world works. Sometimes they do these things to find peace.
Buddhism does not say if gods exist or not, but one can read many stories about gods in Buddhist books. Buddhists do not believe that people should look to gods to save them or bring them enlightenment. The gods may have power over world events and they might help people, or they might not. But it's up to each person to get to "enlightenment". Many Buddhists honor gods in ritual. Many believe the stories about gods are just there to help us learn about parts of ourselves.
What is a Buddha?
"Buddha" is a word in the very old Indian languages Pāli and Sanskrit which means "Enlightened one". The word "Buddha" often means the historical Buddha named Buddha Shakyamuni (Siddhartha Gautama), but "Buddha" does not mean just one man who lived at a certain time. It is used for a type of person, the equivalent of a prophet, and there have been many. There were Buddhas a very long time ago, and there will be for a long time in the future.
A Buddha is a human being who has woken up and can see the true way the world works. This knowledge totally changes the person. Some say this puts them beyond birth, death, and rebirth. Others think this represents the final extinction of desire. This person can help others become "enlightened" too.
To learn more, read: Buddha.
Who was the first Buddha?
According to Buddhism, there were countless Buddhas before Gautama Buddha and there will be many Buddhas after him. In short, he is not the first, nor will he be the last.
However, counting from the present "kalpa" (the beginning of our present universe) Buddha Gautama is considered the fourth Buddha. The first is Gakusandho Buddha, second Gonakamano Buddha and the third Gassapo Buddha. The last Buddha of this "kalpa" will be Mettaya Buddha. Then the universe will renew itself and from then begins a new "kalpa".
Old stories say that Siddhārtha Gautama was born around the 6th century BC. He was the one who would become the first Buddha in written history. Some Buddhists believe that Siddhārtha Gautama was a perfect person.
He was born a prince, but he wanted to learn the answer to the problem of human "suffering", or pain. He gave up all his money and power, and became a monk without a home. He walked from place to place, trying to learn the answers to life.
At last he found enlightenment while sitting under a big tree called the "Bodhi Tree". He was the first person to teach "Buddhism" to the people, and "Buddhists" love him for that.
After Siddhārtha Gautama died, his students taught the Buddha's teaching to more people. After a long time, they wrote down the things that he may have said.
To learn more, read: Siddhārtha Gautama.
The Three Jewels.
Buddhists often talk about the "Three Jewels", which are the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. The Dharma is the way the Buddha taught to live your life. The Sangha is the group of monks and other people who meet together, like a congregation.
Buddhists say "I take "refuge" in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha." This means that these three things keep them safe. They give themselves up to the community and teachings inspired by the Buddha.
Four Noble Truths.
The Buddha's first and most important teachings are the Four Noble Truths.
Five Precepts.
Most Buddhists follow five "precepts", or rules, that say what not to do. The Buddha taught that killing, stealing, having sex in a harmful way, and lying are not signs of skill.
In some types of Buddhism, when a person wants to be a monk, he will follow other "precepts" also.
