"B'Day" is the second studio album by American R&B singer Beyoncé, released by Columbia Records on 1 September 2006 outside North America, on September 4, 2006 worldwide, and on September 5, 2006 in Canada and the United States. The album's title comes from the fact that September 4, the date of worldwide release, is Beyoncé's birthday (2006 being her 25th). "B'Day" won the award for "Best Contemporary R&B Album" at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards. A two-CD deluxe edition of the album, including previously unreleased material in English and Spanish, was released on April 3 2007.
B'Day Deluxe Edition.
Columbia Records released "B'Day - Deluxe Edition", an expanded two-CD edition of R&B singer Beyoncé Knowles's "B'Day", on Tuesday, April 3 2007 in the U.S. and on Monday, April 23 2007 in the UK. In addition to the original twelve tracks from the album, disc one features five brand-new songs in English and disc two features six new Spanish language tracks. The album also featuers a cover of Des'ree's "Kissing You" renamed "Still in Love (Kissing You)". On the same day, a DVD featuring video clips for all tracks from "B'Day" was released as a Wal-Mart exclusive. With the release of the deluxe edition, "B'Day" made a jump from number sixty-nine back up to number six on the Billboard 200, selling 126,000 copies, and also went to number one on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums.
The Australian, European, and Japanese versions include both the deluxe edition of "B'Day" as well as the music video DVD.
In the week of April 22, the Deluxe Edition of B'Day and the Anthology Video album, which include the song "Still in Love (Kissing You)", were pulled from distribution because of a lawsuit filed by British singer Des'ree. The lawsuit is over Beyoncé's cover of Des'ree's "I'm Kissing You", which was given permission, but within certain limits; the song could not be used in video form, and the title should not be changed. On March 27, according to the complaint, they discovered that Beyoncé and her record label planned to include the song on the re-release anyway, changing the title of the song and making a video. In a letter to Beyoncé's lawyer and her distribution group Sony, the Royalty Network called the move "completely unacceptable". The version of the Deluxe Edition with the track has been discontinued and replaced by a version with the international track "If" and placing "World Wide Woman" in the main track list.
