Balto is a Siberian Husky. Most people have mistaken him for being Part Wolf or Part Malamute. He was born in 1923 and died 1932. In January 1925 a bad disease spread across the town of Nome, Alaska. The cure to this disease in the town expired in 1923. So they had to call some more to cure this deadly disease. They first tried by ship but the ice was closing into the Bering Sea, so the ship couldn't port. They tried by air but the blizzard was too strong. So by train from Anchorage, Alaska to Nenena, Alaska they sent the medication. Than by sled dog they replayed the antitoxin. The dog witch ran the longest longest was Togo. Balto was the dog witch lead the team into the town. And saved many of children (Near most). He received a hero's welcome as did the rest of the surviving dogs and mushers. About a few months later in New York City a statue of Balto ("right") was placed in Central Park. Which it is still their today.
The Serum Run.
In January 1925, doctors realized that a potentially deadly diphtheria epidemic was poised to sweep through Nome's young people. The only serum that could stop the outbreak was in Anchorage, nearly a thousand miles (1,600 km) away. The only aircraft that could quickly deliver the medicine was taken out of winter storage, but its engine was frozen and would not start; after considering alternatives, officials decided to move the medicine by sled dog. The serum was transported by train from Anchorage to Nenana, where the first musher embarked as part of a relay aimed at delivering the needed serum to Nome. More than 20 mushers took part, facing a blizzard with −53 °F temperatures and strong winds. News coverage of the race was worldwide.
After the events.
Dedicated to the indomitable spirit of the sled dogs that relayed antitoxin six hundred miles over rough ice, across treacherous waters, through Arctic blizzards from Nenana to the relief of stricken Nome in the Winter of 1925.
Endurance · Fidelity · Intelligence ”
On December 22, 1995, Universal Pictures released the animated film Balto. The film was based on the events of the 1925 Serum Run.
They also made a 2nd and 3rd movie to the original.
