Zahiruddin Babur or "Zahir-ud-din Mohammad Babur" (February 14, 1483 – December 26, 1530) was an emperor from Fergana who defeated Hindu kings many times using new technology and started the Mughal Empire in India. He was descended from both Genghis Khan and Tamerlane. Many people from India consider him to have been a great emperor.
Babur (1526 – 1530) Descendant of the Taimur Lang from his father’s side and Ghenghis Khan, Babur was the first ruler or founder of the Mughal Empire. Jahiruddin Muhammad Babur was born at Fargan state in Turkistan in February 14th, 1483. His name, ‘Babur’ meant ‘lion’ and he proved the justification of his name, as he had courage and audacity just like a lion.
When Babur was only eleven (11) years old, his father, Omar Shiekh Mirza, died. As soon as the old Sheikh had died, Babur’s cousins and uncles turned against him and he had to run away. He returned three years later and took control of the city Samarkand. But one day, while he was out on an expedition to Fargana to regain the city, his enemies won back the city, Samarkand. As Babur went wandering around mountains, he slowly assembled a small army and attacked Kabul in 1504 A.D. He then became to be known as ‘Ameer’ of Kabul.
In 1525 Babur set out to attack and conquer India. He had only about twelve thousand men with him but he had been promised help by Daulat Khan, the governor of Punjab. They marched together against Ibrahim Lodi, who was the sultan of Delhi at that time. When Babur reached India, Daulat was afraid to help him, and Babur started off to Delhi by himself with his small army of men.
Ibrahim Lodi was reported to have one hundred thousand men and one hundred elephants. But Babur had something which Ibrahim did not have – guns. There were hardly any guns at that time in India and Babur had managed to get hold of some in Kabul. He had cannons and some rifles as well.
The two armies met at a place called Panipat, a small village near Delhi. Both armies remained in position opposite each other for a week before the battle began. Babur was an excellent general and he planned the battle very carefully as conquering Delhi was indeed very important to him. After the battle about fifteen thousand men of the enemy were killed including their commander Ibrahim Lodi.
Before the enemy could recover from their defeat, Delhi was captured again.
Babur had to fight more battles, the Battles of Khanua and Gogra. In 1527 A.D. he had to face a fierce enemy of his, the Rajput hero, Rana Sangram (or Sanga). A ferocious battle was fought between the two in the field of Khanua and Babur won the battle magnificiently. In 1529 A.D., Babur got into a battle with the Afghans. Babur won, but the Afghans were not totally weakened. They joined hands with Mahmud Lodi, the brother of Ibrahim Lodi, to fight Babur again. But Babur approached forward and was a successful winner of this Battle in Gogra.
After all these victorious battles, Mughal Rule started under Babur. But, unfortunately, Babur, could not have enjoyed it for long. When his son Humayun fell ill, Babur prayed to God to spare his son at the cost of his life.Soon after that, Humayun recovered miraculously and Babur fell ill. He died in 1530. He was buried in Kabul.
As a person, Babur was very emotional and affectionate towards his family, his people, his empire and his labor. He believed that peace can only be obtained by accepting other races and religions and not creating any sort of difference. He told Humayun that “Islam can better be preached by the sword of love and affection, rather than the sword of tyranny and persecution.” Giving love to his people would be the only way of uniting everyone, was one Babur’s beliefs.
