Books of the Bible are listed differently in the canons of Jews, and Catholic, Protestant, Greek Orthodox, Slavonic Orthodox, Georgian, Armenian Apostolic, Syriac and Ethiopian Churches, although there is substantial overlap. A table comparing the canons of some of these denominations appears below, for both the Old Testament and the New Testament. For a detailed discussion of the differences, see "Biblical canon".
The Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and Eastern Catholic churches may have minor differences in their lists of accepted books. The list given here for these churches is the most inclusive: if at least one Eastern church accepts the book, it is included here. The books included by the Roman Catholic Church are universally included in the Eastern canons.
Tanakh or Old Testament.
A table cell with an asterisk (*) indicates that a book is present but in a different order. Empty cells indicate that a book is absent from that canon; such books are often called "apocrypha", a term that is sometimes used specifically (and possibly pejoratively) to describe the books in the Catholic and Orthodox canon that are absent from the Protestant Bible; Orthodox and Catholic Christians describe these books as "deuterocanonical", meaning second canon.
New Testament.
In general, among Christian groups the New Testament canon is agreed-upon, although book order can vary.
The Ethiopian Orthodox Church has a few additional books in its canon: Jubilees, Book of Enoch, and the Rest of the Words of Baruch (4 Baruch).
The Peshitta excludes 2-3 John, 2 Peter, Jude, and Revelation, but Bibles of the modern Syriac Orthodox Church include later translations of those books along with the Letter of Baruch. Still today the official lectionary followed by the Syrian Orthodox Church (with headquarters at Kottayam (Kerala), and the Chaldean Syriac Church, also known as the Church of the East (Nestorian), with headquarters at Trichur (Kerala)) presents lessons from only the twenty-two books of Peshitta, the version to which appeal is made for the settlement of doctrinal questions.
Third Epistle to the Corinthians was once considered part of the Armenian Orthodox Bible, but is no longer printed with modern editions.
Anglican Apocrypha.
These are the Anglican Apocrypha as defined by the 39 Articles. The Apocrypha Books are ordered according to the Vulgate. The Lutheran Apocrypha is different.
Notes.
Return links: Tanakh or Old Testament — New Testament
