Baden-Württemberg is a federal state in Germany. It has an area of 35 752 km² and a population of nearly 11 million people. The capital is Stuttgart. The Minister President is Günther Oettinger of the (CDU).
It is the third biggest state in Germany. Only Bavaria and North Rhine-Westphalia have more people living there.
The federal state is located in the southwest of Germany. It shares borders to the east with the state of Bavaria, to the north with the states of Hesse and Rhineland-Palatinate, to the west with the country of France (along the River Rhine) and to the south with the countries Switzerland and Austria.
History.
In 1952, the three states of Baden, Württemberg-Baden and Württemberg-Hohenzollern joined together to found Baden-Württemberg.
Politics.
The Minister President is the chief of the government of Baden-Württemberg. The government is made up of ministers and state secretaries.
Baden-Württemberg is a conservative minded state.
The CDU is the main political party in the state, and since 1953, the Ministers President have all been members of the CDU. Between the years 1972 and 1992, the members of the Landtag of Baden-Württemberg were mostly members of the CDU. But the state is also a stronghold of the "Grünen" which were founded in the early 1980s in Karlsruhe. The election results of the Grünen in Baden-Württemberg have always been above the election average for the party in Germany.
Tourism.
The Black forest, the Swabian Alb and the Lake Constance are world famous holiday regions. The highest mountain is the Feldberg (1492m).
Other important cities in Baden-Württemberg besides the capital city of Stuttgart are: Freiburg, Heidelberg, Rastatt, Karlsruhe, Mannheim, Ulm and Heilbronn.
The Danube, the Neckar and the Rhine are important rivers which are located in the state.
Religion.
In the northern part of Württemberg and the Kurpfalz the majority are Protestants. But the other parts of the state, especially the south, the majority are Roman Catholics.
Sports.
Football is the most popular sport in Baden-Württemberg. The best clubs are the VfB Stuttgart and the Karlsruher SC (Karlsruher SC or KSC).
