Barrie O. (Orville) Ward (born January 30, 1949) is a Canadian broadcaster, writer, journalist and educator. Ward has worked since the 1960s in private and public broadcasting.
Professional career.
Ward was trained in radio skills by Roy Currie - one of the first graduates of the Lorne Greene Academy of Radio Arts in the 1940s. His communications career has been heavily concentrated on passing on skills to another ‘younger’ generation of communicators - mostly indigenous people.
Ward has worked for and with Canada's aboriginal broadcasters for almost four decades and has worked for MBC Radio and Television since 1986. He also has written a number of documentary scripts for television including APTN (Aboriginal Peoples Television Network) for which he developed and wrote the concept and the initial seasons scripts for the series Heartbeat of The Earth. Ward has written a wide spectrum of other broadcast materials from educational scripts to curriculums of instruction and from policies & procedures to community radio manuals. He has penned over two thousand scripts on health, education, personal safety, the environment, Canadian law and a plethora of eclectic topics over the last two decades.
Ward is a highly skilled broadcaster, writer, journalist and teacher in all aspects of radio and television arts and has been professionally and publicly recognized with major awards for his lifetime contributions to Canadian aboriginal broadcasting. He has been a catalyst for the expansion and growth of media ownership and usage by the heretofore dispossessed in Canada’s hinterlands.
Personal life.
Ward's personal life saw him married in 1971 and he and his wife Elisabeth (a teacher) have two grown and married children - both with successful professional careers.
Ward served three terms as the Mayor of his small residential community of Weldon Saskatchewan and has served multiple terms as an executive on the boards of directors of various civic agencies and organizations. He has on occasion taken a few breaks from the media over the past four decades to continue work as a vocational counsellor and also to expand his 'amateur' wildlife artists skills.
Ward has been the recipient of two major citations for exemplary personal conduct one from the City of Saskatoon and the other from the Order of St. John of Jerusalem.
