The Beer Hall Putsch was a failed coup d'etat in Munich, Germany between the evening of November 8 and the morning of November 9, 1923. The Nazi party under Adolf Hitler tried to take over the government of Bavaria, a state in Germany after taking several hundred people hostage in a night club. Several Nazis died when they got into a gun fight with police officers in another part of Munich, and Hitler went to jail afterwards for about a year.
Why?
Hitler chose this time for many reasons. The Weimar Republic of Germany was weak because of fighting between right and left-wing parties. Inflation had also left the Weimar Republic with very little support from the people, or money to keep working (paying bills, or even paying pensions and wages).
The Nazi party was getting very strong. Hitler was a strong leader. In 1923, the year when the Weimar Republic was least popular, the Nazi party grew from 6,000 members to 55,000 members.
Hitler also wanted to copy Mussolini, who had taken power in Italy by marching into Rome.
What Happened?
8 November 1923 - Hitler and his men charged into the Beer Hall and forced the people there to support him. Hitler's men, the SA took over the Army Headquarters, but forgot to take over the telegraph office. This meant that anybody could call in the police.
9 November 1923 - 16 Nazis were killed in a gunfight between the Nazis and the police in "Residenzstraße". Hitler was arrested two days later.
Results.
The Nazi party broke up and Hitler was sent to prison for nine months.
Hitler's reputation grew hugely. Before, he was unknown. But after this, he was a hero to many. Many Germans at that time wanted a strong leadership after the governments of the Weimar Republic.
Hitler also took the nine months he had in prison to write a book, called Mein Kampf or "My Struggle". It sold millions and told people about his ideas. Mein Kampf also made Hitler popular.
Hitler also had to re-think his strategy. He realised he could not take power as Mussolini had done, he had to get power through being elected.
People who died during the Putsch.
The people who died during the Putsch are seen as the first to die for the Nazi party and are mentioned in Mein Kampf as Martyrs.
