The Bundesgerichtshof ("Federal Supreme Court") (BGH) is the highest German court for civil and criminal law. It is one of the five Supreme Courts in Germany.
are the other supreme courts. They only hear cases about their areas of law. There is no appeal from any of the supreme courts, unless someone's human rights are affected which is a matter for the Bundesverfassungsgericht - the Federal Constitutional Court to decide. If a matter of European law is being decided, the Supreme courts must decided the case first, before appealing to the European Court of Justice.
History.
The Bundesgerichtshof was founded in 1950. Its headquarters were in the old Palace of the "Hereditary Grand Duke" (the "heir apparent") of Hesse in Karlsruhe.
Another part, the 5th criminal division is based in the "Villa Sack" in Leipzig. The idea was to move all of the court there after the reunification. The judges did not want to move so instead only the 5th criminal division was moved from Berlin to Leipzig.
The 5th division used to meet in West Berlin so that appeal cases could be heard in the city without having to take criminals across the DDR. The Federal Administrative Court moved into the Villa sack as well on August 22nd, 2002.
Organisation.
The BGH is divided into "senates". Each Senate has a judges as chairman and four assessors.
Civil courts of appeal.
Which senate hears a case depends on what is being argued about.
I. Copyrights, trademark rights, dishonest competition
VI. "Deliktsrecht" Compensation after illegal acts
VII. Planning and building laws and regulations
IX. Acts by lawyers and tax consultants, insolvency law
X. Patent and registered design law, "kind protection" (that is, protecting types of plants a breeder has grown), travel contract law
XII. Family law and rent law
Criminal divisions.
The criminal senates hear cases from the 24 Higher Regional Courts. Which senate depends on which court the appeal comes from.
1. Bamberg, Karlsruhe, Munich, Nuremberg and Stuttgart as well as armed forces crimes and offence against the national defence;
2. Frankfurt am Main, Jena, Koblenz and Cologne;
3. Celle, Düsseldorf, Oldenburg and Schleswig as well as state security crimes;
4. Hamm, Naumburg, Rostock, Saarbrücken and Zweibrücken, as well as traffic crimes;
5. (based in Leipzig): Supreme Court of Berlin and the Higher Regional Courts of Brandenburg, Brunswick, Bremen, Dresden and Hamburg as well as tax and customs crimes.
