Blackletter or Gothic script is an old way to write text. Everybody in Western Europe used to write in Blackletter between the 12th and 16th century. In art history this period of the Middle Ages is called gothic.
Some people call Blackletter Old English. This is not correct, because Old English is many centuries older. Also "Gothic" script has nothing to do with the Goths. They lived in central Europe from the 3rd to 6th century and wrote in Runes.
Origins.
Carolingian minuscule was the direct and linear ancestor of blackletter. Blackletter developed from Carolingian as an increasingly literate twelfth century Europe required new books in many different subjects. New universities were founded, each producing books for business, law, grammar, history, and other pursuits, not solely religious works for which earlier scripts typically had been used.
These books needed to be produced quickly to keep up with demand. Carolingian, though legible, was time-consuming and labour-intensive to produce. It was large and wide and took up a lot of space on a manuscript in a time when writing materials were very costly. As early as the eleventh century, different forms of Carolingian were already being used, and by the mid-twelfth century, a clearly distinguishable form, able to be written more quickly to meet the demand for new books, was being used in north-eastern France and the Low Countries.
The name "Gothic" script.
The term "Gothic" was first used to describe this script in fifteenth century Italy, in the midst of the Renaissance, because Renaissance Humanists believed it was a barbaric script. "Gothic" was a synonym for "barbaric". Flavio Biondo, in "Italia Illustrata" (1531) thought it was invented by the Lombards after their invasion of Italy in the sixth century.
Not only were blackletter forms called "Gothic script", but any other seemingly barbarian script, such as Visigothic, Beneventan, and Merovingian, were also labeled "Gothic", in contrast to Carolingian minuscule, a highly legible script which the Humanists called "littera antiqua", "the ancient letter", wrongly believing that it was the script used by the Romans. It was invented in the reign of Charlemagne, although only used significantly after that era.
The blackletter must not be confused either with the ancient alphabet of the Gothic language or with the sans-serif typefaces that are also sometimes called "Gothic".
Textualis.
"Textualis", also known as "textura" or "Gothic bookhand", was the most calligraphic form of blackletter, and today is the form most associated with "Gothic". Johannes Gutenberg carved a textualis typeface – including a large number of ligatures and common abbreviations – when he printed his 42-line Bible. However, the textualis was rarely used for typefaces afterwards.
According to Dutch scholar Gerard Lieftinck, the pinnacle of use for blackletter was the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. For Lieftinck, the highest form of "textualis" was "littera textualis formata", used for "de luxe" manuscripts. The usual form, simply "littera textualis", was used for literary works and university texts. Lieftinck's third form, "littera textualis currens", was the cursive form of blackletter, extremely difficult to read and used for textual glosses, and less important books.
Cursiva.
"Cursiva" refers to a very large variety of forms of blackletter; as with modern cursive writing, there is no real standard form. It developed in the fourteenth century as a simplified form of "textualis", with influence from the form of "textualis" as used for writing charters. "Cursiva" developed partly because of the introduction of paper, which was smoother than parchment. It was therefore, easier to write quickly on paper in a cursive script.
In "cursiva", descenders are more frequent, especially in the letters f and s, and ascenders are curved and looped rather than vertical (seen especially in the letter d). The letters a, g, and s (at the end of a word) are very similar to their Carolingian forms. However, not all of these features are found in every example of "cursiva", which makes it difficult to determine whether or not a script may be called "cursiva" at all.
Lieftinck also divided "cursiva" into three styles: "littera cursiva formata" was the most legible and calligraphic style. "Littera cursiva textualis" (or "libraria") was the usual form, used for writing standard books, and it generally was written with a larger pen, leading to larger letters. "Littera cursiva currens" was used for textbooks and other unimportant books and it had very little standardization in forms.
Hybrida.
"Hybrida" is also called "bastarda" (especially in France), and as its name suggests, refers to a hybrid form of the script. It is a mixture of "textualis" and "cursiva", developed in the early fifteenth century. From "textualis", it borrowed vertical ascenders, while from "cursiva", it borrowed long f and ſ, single-looped a, and g with an open descender (similar to Carolingian forms).
