Barbara Bush (born June 8, 1925) is the wife of George H. W. Bush, the 41st President of the United States. She acted as the First Lady of the United States from 1989 to 1993. She is the mother of current U.S. President George W. Bush and Former Governor of Florida, Jeb Bush. She is the sister of Scott Pierce.
Her birthplace is Rye, New York, near New York City. Her birth name is Barbara Pierce. Her parents were Pauline Robinson (1896-1949) and her husband, Marvin Pierce (1893-1969). Her mother died in a car accident. Her ancestor Thomas Pierce, an early New England colonist, was also an ancestor of Franklin Pierce, the 14th President of the United States.
She spent her early childhood in Rye, New York. She began her studies in a school in Rye, New York. Then she studied in a boarding school at Ashley Hall in Charleston, South Carolina.
In a dance party she met George H. W. Bush. At that time she was a girl of 17 years, and Bush was a student at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts. They got engaged just before Bush went to fight in the Second World War. He was a torpedo bomber of the United States Navy. Bush named three of his airplanes after Barbara: "Barbara," "Barbara II", and "Barbara III". In December 1944, Bush returned to the USA on leave. Two weeks later, they married on 6th January 1945. After the Second World War, Bush graduated from the Yale University. They moved to Midland, Texas, Texas.
Over the years, the Bush family had moved 29 times. George H. W. Bush had become a successful person and had founded Zapata Corporation. He served in a variety of government jobs. In 1989, he became the 41st president of the United States of America. Barbara Bush became the First Lady. She did her role as the First Lady in a nice way.
After, her husband retired as the president, they moved to Houston, Texas. There they live in a big house in Kennebunkport, Maine. Several schools bear the name of Barbara Bush. Sometimes, Barbara Bush had given sharp comments on certain matters.
