Basketball is a very popular sport played with a round, orange ball that bounces, also called a basketball. It was invented in Springfield, Massachusetts by a Canadian professor named Dr. James Naismith.
Basketball is popular in the United States and other countries. It is played in the summer Olympic Games. Women's basketball is the same, but uses a ball that is 1 inch smaller in circumference.
History.
In early December 1891, Dr. James Naismith, a PE (physical education) teacher needed a energetic indoor game to keep his students occupied and away from boredom. After rejecting other ideas, he wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto a 10-foot tall pole. Unlike modern basketball hoops, the bottom of the basket was still there, so after a point was scored, somebody had to get the ball from the basket. Over time, people made a hole at the bottom of the basket so the ball could go through more easily. The peach baskets were used until 1906 when they were finally replaced by metal hoops with backboards.
Rules and the game.
Basketball is played with two teams, with 5 players from each team on the court at one time. The court, where the game is played, is a rectangle shape, and at both endlines there is a goal called a "hoop" in the shape of a basket with the bottom cut out. Players try to score points by "shooting" (throwing) the ball at the hoops at either the end of the court. The players of the opposing team will try to block them from making a goal. However, if you try to block them over the back or through the arms it is considered a foul. A foul, if called on you, lets the opposite team shoot two shots from the free throw line counting one point each. Players must "dribble" (bounce) the ball, and not walk with it; they will throw the ball to others on their own team, but will try not to let the opposing team capture the ball. The team who scores the most points wins. Each shot made through the basket is counted as two points. A shot made from 3-point line gives the team three points.
Positions in Basketball.
In professional basketball teams, each player has a position. A position is a job or role that a player has to take part in to play the game. If everyone is doing their job correctly, the team is usually successful.
Other positions, more usual in professional basketball teams, are used in basketball.
