Bipolar disorder is a term from psychiatry. It is a kind of mental illness. People who have it often have mood-swings.
Symptoms.
Sometimes, a person can experience something called mania. Mania is when a person with Bipolar goes from being very happy and friendly to being angry, or very, very sad.
When a person with Bipolar disorder is manic, they might not think as hard about the choices that they make, and sometimes may do things like give things to people, or spend lots of money. This is because during a manic episode, a lot of people start to believe things that aren't really true, or get confused about what's real and what's made up. People can also become aggressive and possibly violent while manic, but this only happens in very, very bad cases, so it's not as common as some people think.
Mania.
There are a few things that a lot of people start to believe when they have manic episodes. Sometimes, they might think they have lots and lots of money, when they really don't. Other times, the person who has a manic episode might think that people they knew are alive, even though the truth is that these people have died. Mental illnesses are different for everyone, so it's important to remember that these things don't happen to all Bipolar people.
Treatment.
Like most mental illnesses, there are ways to treat Bipolar. Sometimes taking medicine or getting therapy can make it easier to control. The same treatments and medicines don't work for everyone, and it's not rare for people to have manic episodes when they stop taking their medicine because they feel like they can control their disorder. Things like this can make Bipolar a difficult illness to live with, but when people are educated about it, it isn't quite as hard.
Manic Depression.
Bipolar Disorder used to be called Manic Depression. This was because the two symptoms were mania and depression. Now psychiatrists and psychotherapists (doctors who specialize in mental illnesses) think bipolar disorder is one illness in its own right, not a combination of two other illnesses, and have developed new treatments and "coping "strategies" (plans to live more easily with bipolar disorder)
