Bollywood (Hindi:, Urdu:) is a word which refers to the Hindi Language movie industry in India
Origin.
It is often used to describe Indian Cinema as a whole, but that is not correct. Bollywood only refers to hindi language films. The term "Bollywood" combines Bombay and Hollywood (where most American movies are made).
Purpose.
Bollywood makes many films each year. Many Bollywood films are called "Masala" films. In Hindi, "Masala" means spice. These movies usually have higher levels of sex, revenge, contrasts of rich and poor in them.
Languages used in Bollywood films.
The films produced in Bollywood are usually in Hindi. Hindustani, the part common to both Hindi and Urdu is porbably a more accurate description. Bollywood makes films in languages of Hindi, Urdu and English. Often, poetic Urdu words are used; see also Lollywood (Pakistan Cinema).
Present languages.
The number of dialogues and songs in English has increased, lately. There are films now where parts of the dialogue are in English. There is also a growing number of films which are in English. Some films are also made in more than one language. This is either done with subtitles, or by using several soundtracks.
What Bollywood films are like.
In general, Bollywood films are like musicals. The audience expects to see catchy music. There are usually song-and-dance numbers woven into the script. Often, the success of a film depends on the quality of such musical numbers. Very often, the film music is released before the film. It helps make the audience bigger.
Actors.
A good entertainer is generally referred to as "paisa vasool". This means "money's worth". Songs and dances, love triangles, comedy and dare-devil thrills are all mixed up. Such films are called "masala" films, after the Hindustani word for a spice mixture, "masala". Like "masalas", these films are a mixture of many things. Shah Rukh Khan is known as the King of Bollywood.
Films.
Bollywood films are often longer that those made in Hollywood. A normal Bollywood film is about 3 hours long. Bollywood films are films produced for the masses. Other Indian films are produced inside or outside of the Bollywood tradition. They sometimes try to set higher standards. They often lose out at the box office to films with more mass appeal.
Plot.
Bollywood plots are usually melodramatic. They frequently use stock elements such as star-crossed lovers and angry parents, love triangles, family ties, sacrifice, corrupt politicians, kidnappers, scheming villains, Hookers with a heart of gold, long-lost relatives and siblings separated by fate, dramatic reversals of fortune, and convenient coincidences.
Change.
Bollywood conventions are changing, however. A large Indian diaspora in English speaking countries, and increased Western influence at home, have nudged Bollywood films closer to Hollywood models. Film kisses are no longer banned. Plots now tend to feature Westernised urbanites dating and dancing in discos rather than arranged marriages.
Film critic Lata Khubchandani writes,"..our earliest films...(had) liberal doses of sex and kissing scenes in them. Strangely, it was after Independence the censor board came into being and so did all the strictures."
