Bushido is a German rap music singer. He was born September 28 1978. His real name is Anis Mohamed Youssef Ferchichi. Bushido left the record company Aggro Berlin in 2001. Now he has his own record label ersguterjunge and insults his old label, for example in the song "Sonnenbank Flavour". Other big hits are "Von der Skyline zum Bordstein und zurück" and "Nie Ein Rapper" ("Never a rapper"). In 2006, he won the category German act of the European Music Awards in Copenhagen.
History.
The artist name "Bushido" is Japanese and means "Way of the Warrior". Bushido was raised by his mother. He met his Tunisian father when he was 26 years old. Bushido was raised in Berlin-Tempelhof and went to the "Gymnasium" (German "Grammar School", the highest school form) which he quit without his Abitur (German "A-Level", right to study at University). He started his drug-selling career.
He first came to rap through graffiti where he painted walls using the name "Fuchs" (German "Fox"). He learned about rap music from his friend Vader(-licious) from DMK (Dark Mingz Klique). Together with King Orgasmus, the three recorded a tape under the name "030" which is the telephone number for Berlin. Bushidos first commercial appearance was on the Frauenarzt-Tape with King Orgasmus for I Luv Money Records in 2002. A short time later he published his self-made first album "King of Kingz".
German Rap is based on a monarchy view of things. Everything is a kingdom and the best rappers are kings. There are currently three Kings: Kool Savas, Azad and Bushido himself. However at that time, nobody knew him, but his raps were thought of being very good. Because he knew that, he named his record "King of Kingz". He said "there can be 2 Kings, one for Berlin (Kool Savas) and one for Frankfurt am Main (Azad). Whatever. I shit on 'em. I'm the King. There is noone despite me. Fuck it. I'm the King of Kings."
This record was his way up. He was signed by Aggro Berlin which released this tape. He then made his well known record "Carlo, Cokxxx, Nutten" (English: "Carlo, Cocain, Hoes") and "Vom Bordstein bis zu Skyline" ("From Pavement to the Skyline") which gained him fame nationwide. His albums however became all banned by the government because of racist terms and disrespect against minorities and females.
In 2004 he quit Aggro Berlin and started his own label Ersguterjunge ("First best boy", a term which was used in the 1930s). He recorded albums and released them every 6 months. Including "Electroghetto", "Carlo, Cokxxx, Nutten 2" and "Staatsfeind Nr 1" ("State enemy No. 1"). He was officially accused for making racist material and disrespect of minorities and females. However, this could not stop him from gaining success and fame. All his Albums gained Top-3 Chart placements. He was the first German Rapper to have two Albums in TOP-10 Charts placement.
Real life.
Other rappers, for example the American rapper Raptile, said that Bushido rapped about a way of life he never lived. Media like CNN showed that this is not true. In August 2005 he was sentenced to jail in Austria for beating someone with his bodyguards. They beat up the person because that person damaged the tires of his automobile. The Austrian judge gave him the option to pay 100.000 Euro (150,000 USD) to get out of jail. This was the highest amount possible by law and the judge thought Bushido could not afford that.
Bushido payed the 100.000 Euro himself. His label Universal wanted to pay it for him but he denied. He said, "What do they think I am? A clown? I got rich with rap within 3 years. I can afford everything. I'm currently on the sunny side of live. And I wont let that be taken away from a judge nor the law. See, I'm even richer than the law thought someone would be."
