Chopsticks are sticks that are used in some Asian countries to carry food from the plate or bowl to the eater's mouth. They are made of wood, gold, silver, ivory, bamboo, or plastic. Gold and silver chopsticks are very heavy and cost a lot of money.
Many people believe chopsticks were invented in ancient China, but people do not know when they were. Today in China and neighboring countries people use chopsticks. They are also used in Korea, Japan, Mongolia,Thailand, Vietnam, and Singapore. In many other countries chopsticks are often found in restaurants of those countries' cuisines.
Where the word for Chopstick is from.
The English word "chopstick" seems to have be from Chinese Pidgin English, a pidgin where "chop chop" meant quickly.
The Mandarin Chinese word for chopsticks is "kuàizi" (筷). It is a word made of different parts; it has the phonetic part of "快", which means "quick", and a semantic part, 竹, meaning bamboo. In Chinese, the old word for "chopsticks", and also in some varieties of modern Chinese such as Hokkien, was "zhù" (MC:) (箸 Pinyin:"zhù", Minnan: "tī"). However, "zhù" became a taboo on ships because it sounded the same as another word meaning "to stop" (住). Consequently, it was replaced by a word of opposite meaning, "kuài" (fast, quick). This gradually spread until it became the word for "chopsticks" in most varieties of modern Chinese. The character for this new meaning of "chopsticks" (筷) for "kuài" has the semantic element of bamboo added to the character meaning "fast" "kuài" (快).
In Japanese, chopsticks are called "hashi", written. They are also known as. This is what is usually printed on disposable chopsticks.
In Korean, 箸 ("jeo") is used in the compound "jeotgarak" (젓가락) which is composed of "jeo" (chopsticks) and "garak" (stick). "Jeo" cannot be used alone.
In Vietnamese, chopsticks are called "đũa"," also from 箸.
In the past.
Chopsticks came from ancient China. They have been in use as early as the Shang dynasty (1600-1100 BC). They were widely used throughout East Asia. Tools like chopsticks were also found in the archaeological site Megiddo in Israel. This discovery may mean there was some form of trade between the Middle East and Asia in early antiquity. Alternatively, such tools may have developed independently in both the Middle East and Asia. Chopsticks were also common household items of civilized Uyghurs on the Mongolian steppes during the 6th–8th centuries.
Chopsticks' name means "the quick little fellows". Also, it is either greedy people who cannot wait for their supper invented the chopstick to get their food or it is Confucius who said people should not take knives onto the table.
Eating with chopsticks.
In countries where chopsticks are used, people use them instead of a knife and fork. The sticks are held together in the same hand. Usually this is the right hand. Some people, especially left-handed ones, have started using chopsticks in the left hand too. At some (formal occasions) it may be considered rude to use chopsticks with the left hand.
Tip: For easier handling in the beginning, hold the sticks at the midpoint as a child would do. With proficiency, hold the sticks at the upper ends for a farther reach and a more mature look.
If the tips fail to line up, it will be difficult to hold things. Hold the chopsticks upright with one of the tips lightly touching the table, and gently push the chopsticks down or gently loosen your grip for a moment to let both tips become equal in length. You can also adjust your grip or holding position this way.
With practice, it is possible to perform step one and two right away, on picking up the chopsticks with one hand smoothly. Hold the chopstick at different angles if necessary in order to feel comfortable with two sticks between your fingers.
Different types of chopsticks.
Chopsticks are used in many countries. Chopsticks are sometimes different in those cultures.
What chopsticks are used for.
Chopsticks are used in cooking to stir materials in a pan, or moving meals from a pan to dishes.
In Japan, people use a single-use chopstick called "waribashi" (split chopstick). Before using, people split it into two. Japanese people also call their chopsticks "hashi". Hashi means bridge.
In Japan, people use chopsticks during the funeral ceremony of Buddhists. After burning the dead, family and friends use chopsticks to move the burned bones of the dead from the coffin to a pot.
Chopsticks in Japan.
Japanese Buddhists in cremation ceremonies never use his chopsticks to pass food to another person because this is taboo. The Japanese people never slide their chopsticks vertically into the bowl, because this is taboo.
Chopsticks and the environment.
Using a set of chopsticks only once, and then throwing them away causes problems for the environment. There are some movements which aim at telling people to use a set of chopsticks more than once. In China, about 45 billion pair of disposable chopsticks are used per year. This is equivalent to 1.7 billion cubic metres of timber -- about 25 million fully grown trees. China is the biggest producer of disposable Chopsticks, about 60.000 people have a job in one of these factories. If production continues at the current level, China's forests will be gone in about a decade.
For this reason, a tax has been introduced on Chopsticks that are only used once. There are also moves to replace disposable chopsticks made of wood by plastic or metal ones.
Chopsticks and health.
In 2003, a study was done. It found that people who use chopsticks regularly have a slightly higher risk of getting arthritis in the hand. With this, cartilage gets worn off, which causes pain in the joints of the hand. This is more common in older people. Another problem is that using certain kinds of Chopsticks may lead to coughing or even asthma.
The Hong Kong Department of Health did a study in 2006. It found that generally, people use chopsticks or other food utensils more often than in 2003 when eating with others. It also found that personal hygiene has improved.
