The Common Cuckoo ("Cuculus canorus") is a well known bird in many parts of the world. It is a member of the group of birds (the order) called Cuculiformes. This includes cuckoos and turacos, about 161 species in all.
The cuckoo gets its names because the male Common Cuckoo sings two notes which sound like the word “cu – ckoo”. The female does not make this sound. She has a loud bubbling call.
The cuckoo is a summer migrant to many parts of Europe and Asia. It spends the winters in Africa.
It is a brood parasite, which means that it lays its eggs in the nests of other kinds of birds who then have to help the baby cuckoo to grow up.
Description.
The Common cuckoo (usually just called “cuckoo” in countries where it lives) is a greyish bird with a slender body, long tail and strong legs. It looks a little bit like a small bird of prey when it flies. The male is dark grey above with a blackish brown tail, spotted and tipped with white and unevenly barred in black. The female is similar but a bit more reddish on the upper breast. It likes to eat hairy caterpillars. It is often found where woods border on to open land.
Laying its eggs.
The cuckoo does not make a nest of its own, and they do not bring up their own young. Instead, the female lays her eggs in the nests of other birds, usually reed warblers, pied wagtails or dunnocks. Each individual cuckoo specialises in just one of these birds. For example, a cuckoo that always lays its eggs in reed warbler nests will lay eggs that look like those of a reed warbler.
The female cuckoo spends a lot of time watching the birds at the nest where she wants to lay an egg. She has to work out the exact time to go and lay her egg while the other birds (the “host parents”, for example reed warblers) are not looking. If the cuckoo lays her egg in the nest before the other bird lays, the reed warbler will notice and knows it is not her egg, and so she will get rid of it. If the cuckoo lays her egg too late, when the reed warbler has finished laying, this will be noticed, too.
When the female cuckoo thinks it is the right moment she will fly down to the reed warblers' nest, pushes one reed warbler egg out of the nest, lays her egg and flies off. This only takes about 10 seconds. The reed warbler will not notice and carries on looking after the eggs. When the cuckoo chick hatches it soon grows very fast. It pushes the other eggs or reed warbler chicks out of the nest. At 14 days old, it is about 3 times the size of the adult reed warblers. The chick has a huge mouth which it opens very wide. It also makes a very fast “cheeping” sound which sounds like a nest full of reed warbler chicks. This makes the parents behave as if they had a nest full of their own chicks.
Sometimes a female cuckoo will find a nest which is already full of reed warbler eggs. She may get rid of them or eat them all, forcing the reed warbler to start another brood. Then she can lay her egg.
The cuckoo only stays in its summer location for about 10 weeks. In Britain, for example, it will arrive around the end of April and the adults may be returning to Africa by the end of June or early July.
References.
“Bird: The Definitive Visual Guide” ISBN 978 1 4053 0633 1
