CLIMAX or 高潮樂隊 is said to be one of the "first Chinese rock bands in ages".
CLIMAX consists of popular comic illustrator and vocalist Elphonso, vocalist Gloria, guitarist Keung, bassist Kei and drummer Barry.
Style.
CLIMAX is considered by many the leading punk rock music outfit of Hong Kong. However, its punk-style is not destructive, rather mischievous and somewhat blissful, though sometimes their acts are interactive, powerful, dynamic and "rapid-fire." Named after Japanese rock music group Buck-Tick's live DVD "Climax Together", CLIMAX has been trying to embrace elements such as pop-rock, rock, rockabilly, big band, ska and traditional Chinese music into their punk sound.
Band History.
The band was first formed in 2004 with the members Elphonso, Keung, Barry, Joey and Goro.
Right after the five members joined forces, the band established a music record label, High Dynasty Limited, setting their sights on promoting local music. At the same time, they also opened a studio where they practiced and recorded music.
Later that year, CLIMAX started to perform in a number of live shows. Their dynamic and energetic live playing received encouraging feedback from rock fanatics. In the same year, they were picked as one of the performing bands of Rockit Hong Kong Music Festival, playing alongside international acts such as Aqualung and The Cooper Temple Clause.
In November 2004, they released their self-financed debut single "The Punk Night Club" in Hong Kong and Japan. In February of the following year, the band's song "Punk Rock New Year" hit #16 spot, a rendition of a famous traditional Chinese New Year tune. Since then, CLIMAX had more opportunities to play in large-scale shows and share the stage with world-class names such as Tat Ming Pair and Denise Ho.
In 2006, vocalist Gloria and bassist Kei joined after Goro and Joey left the band. The band then put together their album "Rock My Planet". It is the first studio recording of the band after they signed to Hong Kong-based international music distributor LOVE DA RECORDS in early 2007.
The new album includes "Punk Rock New Year", the rockabilly single "Start From Radio", which climbed up to #14 on the Ultimate Music Pop Chart and stayed on the chart for three weeks, and the rock ballad "Around The World In 80 Days", their first song featuring Gloria.
