Catherine Howard (between 1520 and 1525 - February 13 1542) was the fifth wife of Henry VIII of England.
Childhood.
Catherine Howard (also spelled Katherine) was born in about 1521. She was the tenth child of Lord Edmund Howard and Joyce Culpepper. Her father was the second son of the Duke of Norfolk. She was a cousin to Anne Boleyn, the second wife of Henry VIII.
Catherine's family was poor so they sent Catherine to live with her step-grandmother, Agnes Tilney. Agnes Tilney, the Duchess of Norfolk, had a large household, but it wasn't very strict. Catherine could read and write, but she was the least educated of Henry VIII's wives.
Catherine was taught music by Henry Manox when she was fifteen years old. They liked one another and he may have seduced her. Later, she denied this. Catherine then fell in love with, and had an affair with, a gentleman at her grandmother's court. He was called Francis Dereham.
Arrival at court.
Catherine became a lady-in-waiting to the queen in 1539 or 1540, when she was about eighteen years old.
The queen then was Anne of Cleves, the fourth wife of Henry VIII. The king disliked Anne of Cleves for many reasons. Some of these reasons were "bad breath", her appearance, and bad smell.
Henry fell in love with Catherine, now probably nineteen but maybe only fifteen years old. Many historians believe that he married her because she was young and healthy, and he wanted a son for an heir. He probably believed that Catherine could give him a son because she was young and healthy.
In July 1540, after Henry had divorced Anne of Cleves, Henry and Catherine got married at Oatlands Palace in Surrey.
Marriage.
Henry VIII adored his young bride and showered her with gifts. Despite this, Catherine was very unhappy because her husband was very fat (he was about 300 pounds at the time) and had stinking ulcers on his legs. So, she found a lover, who was another of her cousins, Thomas Culpepper. Thomas Culpepper was very handsome, but he had a bad reputation. He was accused of having raped a woman and killed her husband. Catherine did not take any notice of these rumourse, because she was head over heels in love with Thomas.
Downfall.
Rumors that Catherine was unfaithful began to be repeated at court. Then Francis Dereham told
people about the affair he had had with Catherine, and officials started to ask questions about what she was doing in private. Catherine then, in 1541, was arrested and charged with high treason. Henry was very upset and cried, but he made up his mind that Catherine was to be executed, just like her cousin, Anne Boleyn.
In February of 1542, Catherine was told that she was to die. She was being kept a prisoner at Hampton Court Palace. When she heard that the king was in the palace, she got away from her guards and ran towards the room where she thought he was, crying out for mercy, but Henry did not hear her. She was terrified of being executed, so she asked to see the executioner's block and practised putting her head on it. The next morning, she was pale going to the block, but she was calm.
There is a legend that before Catherine died, she announced, "I die a Queen, but I would rather have died the wife of Culpepper." The story is not true.
The executioner chopped her head off. She was aged between seventeen and twenty-two. She is buried in St. Peter Ad Vincula, the parish church of the Tower of London.
