The Bundesregierung is sometimes called the Bundeskabinett or Federal Cabinet is the government of the Federal Republic of Germany it and consists of the Chancellor and the Federal Ministers.
The job of the cabinet is listed in the articles 62 to 69 of the constitution. This also has the oath of office that the minister must take.
The Chancellor is responsible for the administrative work of the Federal Government, but the work is delegated (passed on) to the Head of the Federal Chancellery.
The Chancellor sets the general policy of the Federal Government, and what each ministry should do. The Federal Ministers are responsible for what happens in their own departments, and for making sure that the ministry keeps to the general ideas of the Chancellor. This is known as the departmental principle ().
If two Federal Ministers disagree about what should be done or about who is to do it or how it is to be done, the Federal Government decides with majority decision. The is called the cooperative principle ().
The "Federal Minister law" () says that a retired member of the Federal Government can have a retirement pension, if they have been a minister for at least two years. Time as a junior minister (US "Undersecretary") who in Germany are called parliamentary permanent secretaries is counted, and so is previous membership of a Land government.
Parliamentary permanent secretaries and state ministers are not members of the Federal Government but do help them in their job.
As a rule, the Federal Cabinet meets in the Federal Chancellery every Wednesday at 9.30 hours.
Current make-up of the Federal Government.
Only members of CDU/CSU and SPD are in the current Federal Government. Eleven of the 16 members of the Federal Government are members of the Bundestag.
Seniority in the Federal Government.
ยง 22 of the "Standing Orders of the Federal Government" controls the seniority in meetings of the Federal Government.
If the Chancellor is absent, the Deputy Chancellor is the chairman of the Federal Government. If the deputy is also absent, the longest serving or the oldest minster chairs the meeting.
These rules mean that the order of seniority is in this table
Lawyers in the Federal Government.
This table lists the number and percentage of members of the federal government who were lawyers. In Germany the time between elections is called a "legislative period". In the United Kingdom this would be called a Parliament or in the United States a Congress
