Caffeine is a drug (or chemical) that is found in plants. In large amounts it can kill humans and other animals. Even small amounts can kill some animals, such as dogs.
Where caffeine is from.
Caffeine is the main drug that is in coffee. Coffee comes from a tree. The seeds of the tree are roasted to make coffee.
Caffeine comes from other plants as well. It is found in guarana, yerba maté, cacao, and some plants used to make tea. The plants use caffeine as a "pesticide". This is a chemical that kills insects if they eat the plant. It is the way the plant protects itself.
It is called guaranine when it comes from the guarana plant and theine when it comes from a tea plant. It is called mateine in the mate drink. This drink is an infusion made with Yerba mate.
What caffeine is.
Caffeine is a "stimulant" drug. A stimulant is a drug that increases body actions like heart rate, blood pressure, and metabolism. It makes a person feel more awake and alert.
Caffeine also is a diuretic. This means it makes a person make more urine (the waste liquid a person makes).
The caffeine chemical is called a "xanthine alkaloid". This is a group of chemicals that are stimulants. Some xanthine alkaloids (like theophylline) are used to help asthma.
What caffeine is used for.
The biggest use of caffeine is as a stimulant. People drink coffee and other drinks with caffeine to stay awake.
Doctors sometimes use caffeine as a medicine. It is used for headaches (head pain). It is sometimes used to help premature (born "very" early) babies to breathe. The short-term risk of this treatment seems to be that the babies treated gain less weight than usual.
Caffeine is sometimes given to people after a lumbar puncture. This is a test to see if someone has meningitis (an infection around the brain)."
In the beginning caffeine was found to relieve hunger, so it was used for weight loss. That did not last because people were using too much. Caffeine can be a very dangerous drug when not used in the right way.
Caffeine also has medicinal properties. It is used in many over the counter medicines, such as Excedrin, Midol and Anacin. When combined with other analgesics, caffeine can help to alleviate headaches and cramps.
How much caffeine is safe.
250-300 mg of caffeine a day is a "moderate" amount. This is as much caffeine that is in three cups of coffee (8oz each cup). More than 750-1000mg a day is dangerous, but people who drink more coffee every day can drink more without getting sick. The Lethal Dose 50 of caffeine is 192 mg per kilogram, in rats. In humans, it is between 150 and 200 mg per kilogram.
One ounce – abbreviated oz - is 30ml.
A 'cup' is 8 oz (240ml.)
