Coca-Cola, also known as Coke, is a carbonated, sweetened soft drink that is sold in most countries, and is the world's best-selling soft drink. It is often called a leading global brand. The company's headquarters are in Atlanta, Georgia. Coca-Cola's main rival is Pepsi.
History.
The product that has given the world its best-known taste was first made in Atlanta, USA, on May 8, 1886. Dr. John S. Pemberton, a local pharmacist, produced the syrup for Coca-Cola, and carried a jug of it down the street to Jacobs' Pharmacy, where it was tasted, called "excellent", and sold for five cents a glass. Coca-Cola was first made in Columbus, Georgia. It was called Pemberton's French Wine Coca, and was sold as a medicine. The drink used to be sold at soda fountains in the United States.
Coca-Cola was first sold in bottles on March 12, 1894. It was first sold in cans in 1955. During the first year, sales were about only nine drinks per day. In fact, Dr. Pemberton never realized how much money his soft drink could make. Little by little, he sold parts of his business to different partners, and just before he died in 1888, he sold the rest of his Coca-Cola business to Asa G. Candler. Mr Candler, together with some other businessmen, started the Coca-Cola Company.
How Coca-Cola was named.
The drink is called "Coca-Cola" because of the coca leaves and kola fruits that were used to add flavor.
Thinking that the two Cs would look good in advertising, Dr. Pemberton's partner and bookkeeper, Frank Robinson, suggested the name, and wrote the now famous trademark "Coca-Cola" in his own handwriting.
Coca-Cola's advertising.
Coca-Cola was the first ever sponsor of the Olympic Games. This was for the 1928 Olympic Games in Amsterdam.
Interesting facts.
The name of the flavor base included in the secret formula for 'Coca-Cola' is referred to as 7X.
Only a few people know the secret formula for 'Coca-Cola'. They never travel together.
'Coca-Cola' is the best-known trademark, recognized by 94% of the world's population. It is the most widely recognized word after "OK".
In 1937, Coca-Cola also started to be sold in Australia.
There are almost 10,450 soft drinks from the Coca-Cola Company drunk every second of every day.
Although Coca-Cola is enjoyed ice-cold around the world, in Hong Kong it is sometimes served hot as a remedy for colds.
Other products.
The company sells many other products, including other sorts of Coca-Cola, such as Diet Coke (1981), Cherry Coke (1985), Diet Cherry Coke (1986), Coke with Lemon (2001), Vanilla Coke (2002), Coke with Lime (2004), Coke Zero (2006), Coca Cola with Orange (2007), Diet Coke Citrus Zest (2007).
The Coca-Cola Company also makes and distributes other drinks around the world.
