"Charlotte's Web" is a 1973 animated movie, based on the 1952 children's book of the same name by E. B. White. It was made into an animated musical film by Hanna Barbera Productions and Sagittarius Productions in 1973. The movie, distributed to theatres by Paramount Pictures on March 1, 1973, is the first of only three Hanna Barbera features not based upon one of their famous television cartoons —"Heidi's Song" (1982) and "Once Upon a Forest" (1993) being the other two—and was neutrally successful among both critics and at the movie theatres. The song score of music and lyrics was written by the Sherman Brothers, who had also been done the music in other family movies like "The Jungle Book (1967)" and "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang (1968)". The movie has also found popularity over the years because of television and VHS; in 1994 the movie became one of the best selling movies of the year, 21 years after its first premiere. No other non-Disney musical animated movie has make such a great comeback in popularity which inspried a direct-to-video sequel, ', which Paramount released in the US on March 18, 2003 (Universal released the movie internationally), followed by a live-action film version of E. B. White's original story, which was was released on December 15, 2006. The movie was presented by Pulitzer Prize in 1985, the year in which author E. B. White died. E. B. White himself wrote about the nature of this work based on the original owner of the public.
The Story.
A litter of pigs are born on a farm owned by the Arable family. One of the baby pigs is a runt so John Arable decides to "do away with it". However, when his daughter, Fern Arable, hears of the pig's fate she resues him and tells her dad that it is absurd to kill it just because it is smaller than the others. She gets to raise him and names him "Wilbur". However, after only six months of raising him, John Arable tells Fern that it's time for him to be sold (his brothers and sisters were already sold). Fern sadly says good-bye as the young pig is sold down the steet to her uncle, Homer Zuckerman. When Wilbur wants a play with a lamb, the lamb's father (known as a ram) says that sheep don't play with pigs because it's only a matter of time before they are turned into smoked bacon and ham. Wilbur starts crying saying that he does not want to die, but a voice from above tells him to "chin up". The next day she sings a song about "chinning up", and reveals herself to be a spider named Charlotte. Charlotte saves Wilbur by writing messages in her web, hence the title of the film. Charlotte eventually dies, and although 511 of her children leave the barn (she had 514), three of them stay. But as much as Wilbur loves them, they will never replace the memory of his friend Charlotte.
Release.
The movie was released to theaters on March 1, 1973 by Paramount Pictures in the United States. It was released limitedly on February 22, 1973 in New York City, and also released in West Germany on March 30, 1973, as well as August 11 in Sweden, and August 25 in Japan.
Critical reception.
A reviewer on the website Filmcritic said that the animation was pretty bad, but the story was good. "The 1973 animation (courtesy of Hanna-Barbera) is nothing special, in fact it's often downright "bad", but E.B. White's classic fable needs little to make it come to life. Especially giddy is Paul Lynde's wry Templeton the rat ("It says: Crunchy."), whom I oddly still quote today. Fortunately, the new DVD gives us a widescreen presentation of the film that is scratch-and-pop-free." The reviewer went on to say that the film is "a must-own for anyone with children, and a must-see for everyone else.", and rated it four out of five stars. Rotten Tomatos reported that 74% of the 19 reviewers gave the film a freash rating, with a score of 6.6. The RT community gave the film an 86% apporval rating, with a score of 7/10. Some major critism for the film is simply for the animation, as it's from Hanna-Barbera.
The Allmovie Guide rated the film three and a half out of five stars (7/10 stars) and said: "E.B. White's classic Charlotte's Web is one of the 20th century's most beloved children's books. The film version is a faithful adaptation, retaining all of the characters -- and most of their characteristics. The gentle but mysterious and at times discomforting tone of the original has been kept, and no attempt has been made to soften the existential sadness at the story's core -- the lesson that everyone lives and then dies, even if that death is successfully postponed for a while. Despite this, the film has the book's generally cheerful and optimistic tone. Voice characterizations are good, with Debbie Reynolds a properly maternal and compassionate Charlotte and Henry Gibson innocent and unassuming as Wilbur. Paul Lynde's Templeton is a standout, as would be expected from the natural mating of actor and role. The film's good points are undermined somewhat by a lackluster score (although the title song is rather haunting) and more seriously by the mediocre animation. Although better than its work for television, Hanna-Barbera's animation is too stiff and money-conscious to do justice to the story. That said, the backgrounds are generally very good, and some sequences involving weather and seasons are very effective. While the lack of top-drawer animation dilutes the film's effectiveness, it is still a fine and worthwhile adaptation." Many people have also said that the songs by the Sherman Brothers are weak, while others have said that the songs are great and/or classic. The first comment on IMDb, written on January 25, 1999, and headed as "What a Waist!" said: "If ever a film sucked all the charm and merit from a text, this is it. The characterisations are inane, the songs are instantly forgettable (and why are there songs anyway?), the animation is tacky. Who let Hanna Barbera get there sticky hands on the rights? If someone had to screw it up it should have been Disney. I think its time for a remake in the style of Babe. And let's burn all the master tapes from this version."
E.B. White's Reaction.
According to Gene Deitch, a director of animation and friend of E. B. White, the author's wife wrote the following words in a 1977 letter: "We have never ceased to regret that your version of "Charlotte's Web" never got made. The Hanna-Barberra version has never pleased either of us... a travesty..." E.B. White himself wrote of the film: "The story is interrupted every few minutes so that somebody can sing a jolly song. I don't care much for jolly songs. The Blue Hill Fair, which I tried to report faithfully in the book, has become a Disney World, with 76 trombones. But that's what you get for getting embroiled in Hollywood."
Songs.
"Charlotte's Web" is the title song of the movie. In the movie the song is sung back-to-back with "Deep in the Dark". The title song was covered by the The Brady Bunch among others. In the movie, Charlotte tells Wilbur to go to sleep, and she would see him in the morning, and she sings a song called "Deep In the Dark" to put the barnyard to sleep.
The title song was covered by the The Brady Bunch among others: "The Brady Bunch Phonographic Album" features three Sherman Brothers songs including "River Song" from "Tom Sawyer", "Zuckerman's Famous Pig" and "Charlotte's Web". Their cover of the song is also featured on their "Greatest hits" album "It's a Sunshine Day: The Best of The Brady Bunch".
