Summary.
Pawn - A pawn can only move ahead, to the far end of the board. A pawn is placed in each square on the second row away from each player at the beginning of a game, right in front of all of their other pieces, so each player begins with eight pawns. Most times, a pawn can only move to one square, the square in front of it. But a pawn that has not moved yet in the game can move ahead two squares, or just one. Very often, the first move is that the white player moves his "king's pawn" (that is, the pawn in front of the king) two spaces forward.
If an enemy piece is straight in front of a pawn, the pawn cannot capture that piece. Pawns have a special way to capture. A pawn can capture an enemy piece which is on the square left or right of the square straight in front of it. This is the only time a pawn can move to a square that is not straight in front of it.
If a pawn reaches the end of the board, it is removed and replaced by any other piece except for a king.
If a pawn moves two squares on its first move, it may be taken (on the opponent's next move only'") by an enemy pawn as if it had moved only one. This is called "en passant" (French for "in passing"). But even very good players do not use this rule very much.
Bishop - A bishop can move any number of squares "diagonally", meaning, if you pretend the bishop is in the middle of a big X, it can move to any square along the lines of the X. Because of this, a bishop will be on the same color of squares for the whole game. A bishop is placed on the third and sixth squares from the left in the row closest to each player at the beginning of a game, beside the knights and the queen and king.
Rook - A rook can move any number of squares, up, down, left, or right. Rooks start at the far left and far right squares in the row closest to each player, next to the knights.
Knight - The knight is special because it is the only piece than can move through other pieces. When a knight moves, first it goes two squares in one of the four ways a rook can move. Then the knight ends its move by going one square to the side. The knight is said to move in the shape of an L. See the picture "(picture is coming)". It "jumps over" the pieces on its way to its new square, and does not capture them, but the knight will capture an enemy piece if it lands on one. Knights are placed at the second and seventh squares on the rows closest to each player, between the rooks and the bishops.
Queen - When the queen moves, she can move like either a bishop or a rook. It is placed on the fourth square in the first row in front of the white player, to the left of the king, and on the fifth square in the first row in front of the black player, to the right of the king. A good way to remember where it goes is to remember that the queen starts on the same color square it is, so the white queen starts on a white square (the fourth square on the white player's first row) and vice versa. It is also important to remember that in order for a game to play and for this trick to work correctly, the bottom-right square for each player must be white. Remember, "White is right."
King - The king starts on the fifth square in front of the white player, to the right of the queen, and on the fourth square in front of the black player, to the left of the queen. The king can move to one of the eight squares around it. A king may also perform a special move known as "castling". This is when a king moves two spaces towards a rook, and the rook moves to the square on the other side of the king. This may not be done if: there are pieces (friend or enemy) between the king and castling rook, either the king or rook have moved during the game, or the king or any square the king moves through is threatened by an enemy piece. Castling may not result in the capture of an enemy piece.
