Corsica is the fourth largest island in the Mediterranean Sea (after Sicily, Sardinia, and Cyprus).It is located west of Italy, southeast of France, and north of the island of Sardinia. Corsica is usually considered one of the 26 "régions" of France. Corsica has more power to choose than other French regions, but its status is quite similar to the other "régions". Corsica is referred to as a "région".
Corsica is famous in the world for the beautiful places for tourism and as the birthplace of Napoléon Bonaparte.
Geography.
Corsica has 1,000km of coastline and more than 200 beaches, and is very mountainous, with Monte Cinto as the highest peak at 2706m and 20 other peaks of more than 2000m.
How Corsica is.
Corsica is the most mountainous Mediterranean island. The island has a Mediterranean climate, with hot, dry summers and mild, rainy winters. The natural vegetation is Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and shrubs. The mountains are cooler and are rich of forests of oak, and pine.Much of the coastal lowlands has been cleared for agriculture,which has reduced the mountain forests considerably. The island has a natural park (Parc Naturel Régional de Corse), which protects thousands of rare animal and plant species. The park was created in 1972 and includes the Golfe de Porto, the Réserve Naturelle de Scandola (a UNESCO World Heritage Site), and some of the highest mountains on the island. This park is protected.
Administration.
The capital of the territorial collectivity of Corsica is Ajaccio (Corsican: "Aiacciu"). The territorial collectivity is divided in two "départements": Corse-du-Sud and Haute-Corse. These two "départements" were created on September 15, 1975 by the "département" of Corse.
Economy.
Tourism is the biggest source of Corsican economy. The island has a pleasant climate, beautiful mountains and really beauties coastlines make it a popular destination among the French and other Western Europeans. However, the island has not had the same level of intensive development as other parts of the Mediterranean.Tourism is particularly concentrated in the area around Porto Vecchio and Bonifacio in the south of the island and Calvi in the northwest.
Politics.
Corsica is currently governed almost as any other "région" of France. There are lots of movements on the island the indipendence of Corsica and of Corsicans from France. The French government is against full independence. There is support on the island for to have more autonomy, but polls show that a large majority of Corsicans are opposed to full independence. Some groups who claim to support Corsican independence have carried out a violent campaign since the 1970s that includes bombings and a few accidental assassinations, usually against "pieds-noirs" and other non-Corsicans, or buildings of the French government. Corsican independence groups attack when they are sure there wont be a danger for victims. However not all groups for independence has "nice treaties", Sometimes independence groups are known to practice extortion and other intimidatory tactics, similar to mafia activity in Sicily and southern Italy. Non-Corsican homeowners may be threatened with the destruction of their home, or they are constrict to pay a "revolutionarian tax",for to help the groups in the attacks.
In 2000, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin agreed to give more autonomy to Corsica but just for stopping the violence. The propose of autonomy for Corsica would have included greater protection for the Corsican language (Corsu), the island's traditional language (which is also considered to be a dialect of Italian). However, the plans for increased autonomy were opposed by the Gaullist opposition in the French National Assembly. In a referendum on July 6,2003, a narrow majority of Corsican voters opposed to the project from the government of Jean-Pierre Raffarin and Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy that would have suppressed the two "départements" of the island and granted more autonomy to the territorial collectivity of Corsica.
"U Corsu",dialect of Corsica.
In Corsica the official language is French, but lots of people speak, "u corsu", a dialect of Corsica, protected by UNESCO. Corsu is not different to the dialects (with their accents) of parts of Tuscany or in Sardinia. Corsu has two versions, "Supranacciu", common in the north east of island, (Bastia,Corte), and the "Suttanacciu" common in the south of the island, (Ajaccio,Sartene).
"For more info. about the dialect see also Corsican."
Sport.
In Corsica, football is a very common sport. The island has in the first league of France ('Ligue 1'), 2 teams. The AC Ajaccio and the SC Bastia. Another very famous sport in Corsica, is volleyball, with the "GFCO Ajaccio Volley-Ball' team.
