A comedy is a kind of play (acting in a theater), television show or a movie that is funny, silly, or that makes people laugh. Comedies may also show people telling jokes and funny stories. People who are known for acting in comedies are comedians.
History.
Comedy plays have been around for thousands of years. The ancient Greeks had comedy plays. Many comedy plays were written in the 1500s by the British writer William Shakespeare.
Shakespeare's comedy plays include:" All’s Well That Ends Well, The Comedy of Errors, A Midsummer Nights Dream", and "Twelfth Night".
Sandre Comedy.
There are different types of comedy. One type of comedy is called "slap stick comedy." In "slap stick comedy," people just do silly things such as tripping, falling over or embarrassing themselves just to make people laugh. Slap stick comedy can be used in comedy movies or comedy television shows.
Slap stick comedy was used a lot in silent (no sound) movies from the 1920s. A comedian who acted in the silent movies who used a lot of slapstick comedy was Charlie Chaplin. In the 1950s and 1960s, the comedian Jerry Lewis also used silly slap stick comedy in his comedy movies.
Stand-up comedy.
Another type of comedy is "stand-up comedy." In "stand-up comedy", a comedian (person who tries to make people laugh) stands up in front of a crowd and tells jokes and silly stories. Some comedians, such as Jerry Seinfeld, work as stand-up comedians as a job (way to make money). Other comedians do stand-up comedy in nightclubs (bars where adults drink alcohol and relax) as a hobby (activity that a person does for fun).
Comedy movies.
Comedy movies are very popular type of movie. Some comedy movies have "slapstick comedy," in which people just do silly things such as tripping, falling over or embarrassing themselves just to make people laugh. Other comedy movies show funny stories or situations in which people are behaving in a silly manner. Some comedies make the audience laugh by showing strange or unusual images or situations that do not make sense.
Different types of comedy movies.
Some types of comedy movies mix comedy with other types of movies. *There is a type of movie called a dramedy, which is a mix of a drama movie and a comedy movie.
Comedy television shows.
Comedy shows are very popular on television. Comedy shows on television are often called "sitcoms." The word "sitcom" is a shortened way of saying "situational comedy." Television situational comedies usually show characters who do silly or funny things which make the audience laugh.
