The Chauvet Cave or Chauvet-Pont-d'Arc Cave lies at N 44° 21' and E 4° 29' 24", near "Vallon-Pont-d'Arc", in the Ardèche département, in southern France. It became famous in 1994 when it was found that its walls were richly decorated with Paleolithic artwork, that it contained the fossilized remains of many animals, including some that are now extinct, and that the floor preserved the footprints of animals and humans. The Chauvet Cave was soon regarded as one of the most significant pre-historic art sites, along with Lascaux, Altamira, and Cosquer.
Features.
The gorges of the Ardèche region have many caves, many of them having some geological or archaeological importance. The Chauvet Cave, however, is uncharacteristically large and the quality, quantity, and condition of the artwork found on its walls has been called spectacular. It appears to have been occupied by humans during two distinct periods: the "Aurignacian" and the "Gravettian". Most of the artwork dates to the earlier, Aurignacian, era (30,000 to 32,000 years ago). The later Gravettian occupation, which occurred 25,000 to 27,000 years ago, left little but a child's footprint, remains of ancient hearths and carbon smoke stains from torches that lit the caves.
The soft, clay like floor of the cave retains the paw prints of cave bears along with large, rounded, depressions that are believed to be the "nests" where the bears slept. Fossilized bones are abundant and include the skulls of cave bears and the horned skull of an ibex.
Hundreds of animal paintings have been catalogued, showing at least 13 different species, including those which have rarely or never been found in other ice age paintings. In addition to commonly hunted animals: horses, cattle, reindeer, etc.. The walls of the Chauvet Cave are covered with predatory animals: lions, panthers, bears, owls, rhinos and hyenas. Typical of most cave art, there are no paintings of complete human figures, although there is one possible, partial "Venus" figure that may represent the legs and genitals of a woman. A peculiar figure appears to have the lower body of a woman with the upper body of a bison. There are a few panels of red ochre hand prints and hand stencils made by spitting pigment over hands pressed against the cave surface. Abstract markings—lines and dots—are found throughout the cave. There are also two unidentifiable images that have a vaguely butterfly shape to them. This combination of subjects has led experts in pre-historic art and cultures to believe that there was likely a ritualistic, shamanistic, or magical aspect to these paintings.
The artists who produced these unique paintings used techniques not often observed in other cave art. Many of the paintings appear to have been made only after the walls were scraped clear of debris and concretions. This left a smoother and noticeably lighter area upon which the artists worked. Similarly, a three dimensional quality is achieved by incising or etching about the outlines of certain figures. This visually emphasizes some of the animals and allows torch light to cast shadows about the edges.
Dating.
The cave contains the oldest known cave paintings, based on radiocarbon dating of "black from drawings, from torch marks and from the floors." Clottes concludes that the "dates fall into two groups, one centred around 27,000-26,000 BP and the other around 32,000-30,000 BP." As of 1999, the dates of 31 samples from the cave had been reported, with the earliest being 32,900±490 BP.
However, some archaeologists have questioned these dates.
History.
The cave was named after Jean-Marie Chauvet, who discovered it on December 18,1994, together with Christian Hillaire and Eliette Brunel-Deschamps.
The researchers found that the cave had been untouched for 20,000-30,000 years.
