A celebrity is a person who is well known and gets lots of public attention, or attention from other people. A person whom the public knows such as a person in government might be well known but not a celebrity unless something else makes them interesting to other people. Usually a person becomes a celebrity from entertainment such as people who are in movies, people who sing songs, and someone who plays a sport.
Jobs that offer celebrity.
People who act in movies and television actors, people who sing are usually celebrities. High-ranking politicians, people who tell people the news, television show hosts, people who go to outer space, major-league athletes and people who sing songs are also sometimes celebrities. Sometimes people such as Mother Teresa have achieved fame because they help people who were in need and are saintly.
Celebrity families.
Individuals can achieve celebrity, but there are also many celebrity families, such as various royal families (often interest in these will be highest when scandal is involved, as with the House of Windsor) and artistic 'dynasties' e.g. the Barrymore, Cassidy (David and Shaun Cassidy), the Osmonds, Osbournes, Jackson and Baldwin families, as well as the Kennedys and some sports families.
Celebrity dislikes.
Because celebrities have fame similar to that of royalty or gods in the past, some people are curious about their private lives, and dislike celebrities for their rewards. Many think that celebrities do not work as hard as non-celebrities and that celebrities do not deserve to be treated specially. Since their failures are made public celebrities can been seen as having lower moral values than most people. Not all celebrities exhibit bad behaviour and sometimes they do things that are good and help people.
A recent phenomenon has occured wherenst intricate mrketing plans are developed in order to lure adolescents in to purchasing celebrity related goods.
Some have argued that the idea of "celebrity" is self-reinforcing and becoming empty: some celebrities are not famous for their actions, but simply famous for their fame and money. For example, Paris Hilton would not be a public figure without her money, but her family's importance has created and helps her be well known and a celebrity. Hilton is a special celebrity; a part of her fame is for doing bad things other celebrities do. People call people like Paris "famous for being famous." Some believe she is doing it on purpose, but in many ways, people like Hilton and other 21st century celebrities are just doing what other celebrities did before.
