Chess is a game for two players. It is played on a board, with two colors of pieces. The board is a square, made of 64 smaller squares, with eight squares on each side. Each player starts with sixteen pieces (eight pawns, two each of knights, bishops, and rooks, and one king and queen). The players in a game of chess are called "white player" and "black player", depending on the color of pieces they control.
Each game starts with the pieces set in the same way, which you can see in the picture. The pieces start out, from left to right for the white player, from right to left for the black player, in the first row in front of the players in this order: rook, knight, bishop, queen, king, bishop, knight, rook. A pawn is placed in the square right in front of each piece.
The game commences with the players taking turns moving one piece at a time. White always moves first.
Each piece can only move in a special way. A piece cannot move onto a square that has a friendly piece (meaning, a piece of the same color) on it. A piece also cannot move through squares that have other pieces on them. However, a piece can end its move on a square that has an enemy piece on it. If this happens, the enemy piece is "captured", meaning it is taken off the board and is not in the game anymore.
An alternative version of this game is Transfer Chess.
Check and checkmate.
When a player makes a move that will let him or her capture the enemy king on the next move, the enemy king is said to be in "check." The player whose king is in danger must use a turn to save the king. A player might save the king by moving the king out of the way, capturing the dangerous piece, or moving another piece between the dangerous piece and the king. If the player whose king is in danger cannot do any of these things, it is called "checkmate", and they lose.
Many games of chess end when one player sees they are about to lose, and elect to resign rather than prolong a hopeless game. A player may declare, "Mate in two," (or "three..four...etc.) if they believe the opponent cannot stop them from checkmating in two moves.
A game may end in a draw if both players agree that neither can win.
Strategy.
Chess is a very complex game, and has many different strategies that can be used to win. Most of them are for the beginning of the game, called "opening moves", or simply "openings". The most popular opening, the King's Pawn Opening, involves the white player moving his king's pawn (e2) foward two spaces (e4). Black can respond in many different ways, opening up possibilities for a very complex game.
Other chess openings are more risky. The "Parham Attack" is a very risky move that has the white player moving his queen out in the middle of the board and tries to lure other pieces to capture it. If white loses the queen, white is at a serious disadvantage, because black has more pieces out of the starting position than white. However, if the attack succeeds, white will have many more pieces than black, and black's king will most likely be out in the open and undefended.
