Code Lyoko is a French animated television series.
Story.
Code Lyoko is about five teenagers who are juggling with their normal school life and a virtual world called Lyoko.
Aelita, Ulrich, Yumi and Odd go into the world called Lyoko. Jeremie does not go into Lyoko. Instead, he is the one who lets them go into lyoko. When the 4 of them are ready to go to lyoko he virtualizes them. Then he tells Aelita, Yumi, Ulrich and Odd where the tower is. When Aelita deactivates the tower Jeremie presses a botton on the supercalculator's keyboard and says "retern to the past now" Also, XANA stole the keys to lyoko from Aelita's memory. Then XANA made replikas of Lyoko and, using the Skidblanir, the lyoko warriors destroy the replicas one by one.
Main characters.
Jeremie Belpois'": Jeremie is a very clever boy. He is the best of his class, and even of the school, in all the subjects, except sports. He is also a computer genius. He restarted the supercomputer that contained Lyoko ("see" 3x: XANA Awakens). In the factory, he is the supervisor: he virtualizes the Lyoko warriors and the vehicles, he lets them know the Life Points they still have and where the towers and the monsters are. He has never been seen on Lyoko, but he attempted it a few times. First time, the transfer failed and he was stuck in the Virtual Limbo. The second time, he went to a world parallel to Lyoko, the was made by XANA. The third time, It was successful, but we didn't see him, but according to Odd and Ulrich, he looked "ridiculous".
Odd Della Robbia: Odd's vehicle in Lyoko is the overboard to ride around in Lyoko. Odd's attack is laser arrows that come out of his hand and he screams "laser arrow!" Odd is not very good when it comes to school but he always makes you laugh. Odd wears purple and little bit of yellow.
Ulrich Stern: Ulrich is one of the Lyoko warriors. On Lyoko, he is a samurai, and has a katana, and his vehicle is the overbike. He can use "Triplicate" in order to create two clones of himself, and "Supersprint" to run quickly. When he uses both at the same time, it's called "Triangulate". On Earth, he is very mysterious, and doesn't often speak about himself. He has a crush for Yumi, but they never admit it.
Yumi Ishiyama: Yumi is a Japanese girl. Her vehicle in Lyoko is the overwing. She is a day student at Kadic. She has a crush on Ulrich. She often wears black clothes. She has a brother: Hiroki. In lyoko she wears her traditional Japanese warrior outfit proudly as she defeats XANA's monsters with her metallic fan.
Aelita is someone who does not really fight. She deactivates the tower that XANA activated and she is the only one who can deactivate towers. However, in the third season she can throw energy fields. In the fourth season, she can fly using wings that are activated by a star wristband.
