Child pornography (or "CP") refers to written or electronic material showing or describing children who are in erotic poses or having sex. Usually, these children are shown or described as being in different stages of undress, with some clothes off, or completely naked.
Child sexual abuse happens during the making of child pornography when sexual acts are photographed,and the effects of the abuse on the child (continuing into their adulthood) are made worse by the passing out of, and lasting availability of photographs of the abuse. In both common usage and for the purpose of research (looking up information), the word "child" in the phrase "child pornography" refers to children before they reach puberty, and does not refer to post-puberty teenagers. For practical reasons, the way the law describes child pornography generally refer to a wider age range, including any pornography involving a minor, according to where the law applies. Most people who own child pornography who are arrested are found to own images of children who have not started puberty; owners of pornographic images of post-puberty minors are less likely to be prosecuted, even though those images also fall within the laws.
Child pornography is a multi-billion dollar industry and among the fastest growing crime activities on the Internet, according to the USA The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC), the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children (ICMEC) and other international sources. According to the NCMEC, almost one fifth of all Internet pornography is child pornography. New technology such as inexpensive digital cameras and sending across the internet, such as File sharing, has made it easier than ever before to produce and pass out child pornography. The people who make child pornography try to avoid prosecution by sending their material across borders with other countries, though this issue is being dealt with more and more with regular arrests of suspects from a number of countries happening over the last few years.
Child pornography is looked at and collected by pedophiles for a number of purposes, ranging from private sexual uses, exchanging with other pedophiles, preparing children for sexual abuse as part of the process known as "grooming", or for bribing victims into making more child pornography or going into child prostitution.
