Cricket is a sport. It is played between two teams of eleven players each who score runs (points) by running between two sets of three small, wooden posts called wickets.
Each of the wickets is at one end of a rectangle of flattened grass called the pitch. Around the pitch is a much larger oval of grass called the cricket ground.
The main rules of cricket.
There are two teams. The team bowling has 11 players on the field. The team batting always has two people on the field.
The Captain of the bowling team chooses a bowler from his team; the other 10 players are called fielders. The bowler is trying to aim the ball at a wicket, which is made up of three sticks (called stumps) stuck into the earth, with two small sticks (called bails) balanced on them. One of the fielders, called the wicket keeper, stands behind the wicket to catch the ball if the bowler misses the wicket. The other fielders chase the ball after the batter has hit it.
The bowler throws (bowls) the ball overarm six times, which is called an over; then another player becomes the bowler for the next over, and bowls from the other end, and so on. The same bowler cannot bowl two overs one after the other.
The batter is trying to defend the wicket with his bat. When he hits the ball with his bat, he runs toward the other wicket that the bowler or the other batsman is standing at. To score a run, the two batsmen must both run from their wicket to the other wicket, as many times as they can. If the ball leaves the field after being hit without bouncing, six runs are scored. If the ball rolls or bounces out, whether or not the batter hit it, it counts as four runs.
Where cricket is played.
Cricket is popular in many countries, mostly in Commonwealth countries.
The countries where cricket is most popular compete in international matches (games between countries) that last up to 5 days, which are called Test Matches; those countries are India, Australia, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, South Africa, New Zealand, Zimbabwe and England, as well as a group of Caribbean countries that play together as a team called the West Indies.
Cricket is also played in Kenya, Canada, Bermuda, Ireland, Scotland, and various European and Asian countries; the national teams of those countries can play one-day international matches, but are not allowed to play Test Matches.
Averages.
For a famous example of a batting average, see Don Bradman.
