In Computer science Cloud computing is a systems architecture model for Internet-based computing, it is the development and use of computer technology on the Internet. The "cloud" is a metaphor for the Internet based on how the internet is descried in computer network diagrams; which means it is an abstraction hiding the complex infrastructure of the internet. It is a style of computing in which IT-related capabilities are provided “as a service”, allowing users to access technology-enabled services from the Internet ("in the cloud") without knowledge of, or control over the technologies behind these servers.
According a to paper published by "IEEE Internet Computing" in 2008 "Cloud Computing is a paradigm in which information is permanently stored in servers on the Internet and cached temporarily on clients that include computers, laptops, handhelds, sensors, etc."
Cloud computing is a general concept that utilizes software as a service (SaaS), such as Web 2.0 and other technology trends, all depends on the Internet for satisfying users needs. For example, Google Apps provides common business applications online that are accessed from a web browser, while the software and data are stored on the Internet servers.
Comparisons.
Cloud computing is often confused with grid computing ("a form of distributed computing whereby a "super and virtual computer" is composed of a cluster of networked, loosely-coupled computers, working together to perform very large tasks"), utility computing (the "packaging of computing resources, such as computation and storage are provided as a measured service that have to be paid similar to a traditional public utility such as electricity") and autonomic computing ("computer systems capable of self-management").
Many cloud computing deployments are today powered by grids, have autonomic characteristics and are billed like utilities, but cloud computing can be seen as a "natural next step" from the "grid-utility model". Some successful cloud architectures have little or no centralised infrastructure or billing systems at all including peer-to-peer networks like BitTorrent and Skype.
Architecture.
The majority of cloud computing infrastructure currently consists of reliable services delivered through data centers that are built on computer and storage virtualization technologies. The services are accessible anywhere in the world, with "The Cloud" appearing as a single point of access for all the computing needs of consumers. Commercial offerings need to meet the quality of service requirements of customers and typically offer service level agreements. Open standards and open source software are also critical to the growth of cloud computing.
Characteristics.
As customers generally do not own the infrastructure or know all details about it, mainly they are accessing or renting, so they can consume resources as a service, may be paying for what they do not need instead for what they actually need to use. Many cloud computing providers have adopted the utility computing model which is analogous to how traditional public utilities like electricity are consumed, while others are billed on a subscription basis. By sharing consumable and "intangible" computing power between multiple "tenants", utilization rates can be improved (as servers are not left idle) which can reduce costs significantly while increasing the speed of application development. A side effect of this approach is that "computer capacity rises dramatically" as customers do not have to engineer for peak loads. Adoption has been enabled by "increased high-speed bandwidth" which makes it possible to receive the same response times from centralized infrastructure at other sites.
Providers.
Cloud computing is being driven by providers including Google, Amazon.com, and Yahoo! as well as traditional vendors including IBM, Intel, Microsoft and SAP. It is adopted from individual users through large enterprises as General Electric..
History.
"The Cloud" is a metaphor for the Internet, or more generally components and services which are managed by others.
The underlying concept dates back to 1960 when John McCarthy expressed his opinion that "computation may someday be organized as a public utility" and the term "Cloud" was already in commercial use in the early 1990s to refer to large ATM networks. By the turn of the 21st century, cloud computing solutions had started to appear on the market, though most of the focus at this time was on Software as a service.
Amazon.com played a key role in the development of cloud computing when upgrading their data centers after the dot-com bubble and providing access to their systems by way of Amazon Web Services in 2002 on a utility computing basis. They found the new cloud architecture resulted in significant internal efficiency improvements.
2007 observed increased activity, including Google, IBM and a number of universities starting large scale "cloud computing" research project, around the time the term started gaining popularity in the mainstream press. It was a hot topic by mid-2008 and numerous cloud computing events had been scheduled.
In August 2008 Gartner observed that "organisations are switching from company-owned hardware and software assets to per-use service-based models" and that the "projected shift to cloud computing will result in dramatic growth in IT products in some areas and in significant reductions in other areas".
Political issues.
"Clouds" cross many countries borders and "may be the ultimate form of globalisation". As such it is the subject of complex geopolitical issues, whereby providers must satisfy many legal restrictions in order to deliver service to a global market. This dates back to the early days of the Internet, where libertarian thinkers felt that "cyberspace was a distinct place calling for laws and legal institutions of its own"; author Neal Stephenson envisaged this as a tiny island data haven called Kinakuta in his science-fiction classic novel Cryptonomicon.
Although there have been efforts to match the legal environment (such as US-EU Safe Harbor), providers like Amazon Web Services are currently dealing with international markets (typically the United States and European Union) by deploying local infrastructure and allowing customers to select their countries. However there are still concerns about security and privacy from individual through governmental level, (for example the USA PATRIOT Act and use of national security letters and title II of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, the Stored Communications Act).
Legal issues.
In March 2007, Dell applied to trademark the term '"cloud computing" in the United States. It received a "Notice of Allowance" in July 2008 which was subsequently canceled on August 6, resulting in a formal rejection of the trademark application in less than a week later.
In November 2007, the Free Software Foundation released the Affero General Public License (abbreviated as Affero GPL and AGPL), a version of GPLv3 designed to close a perceived legal loophole associated with Free software designed to be run over a network, particularly software as a service. According to the AGPL license application service providers are required to release any changes they make to an AGPL open source code.
Architecture.
"Cloud architecture" is the systems architecture of the software systems involved in the delivery of "cloud computing" (eg hardware, software) as designed by a "cloud architect" who typically works for a "cloud integrator". It typically involves multiple "cloud components" communicating with each other over application programming interfaces (usually web services).
This is very similar to the Unix philosophy of having multiple programsdoing one thing well and working together over universal interfaces. Complexity is controlled and the resulting systems are more manageable than their monolithic counterparts.
"Cloud architecture" extends to the client where web browsers and/or software applications are used to access "cloud applications".
"Cloud storage architecture" is loosely coupled where metadata operations are centralized enabling the data nodes to scale into the hundreds, each independently delivering data to applications or users.
Storage.
Traditional storage vendors have recently begun to offer their own flavor of cloud storage, sometimes in conjunction with their existing software products (e.g. Symantec's). Others focus on providing a new kind of back-end storage optimally designed for delivering cloud storage (EMC's), categorically known as Cloud Optimized Storage.
Provider.
A "cloud computing provider" or "cloud computing service provider" owns and operates "cloud computing" systems to deliver service to third parties. Usually this requires significant resources and expertise in building and managing the next generation of data centers. Some organisations are realising a subset of the benefits of cloud computing by becoming "internal" cloud providers and servicing themselves, though they do not benefit from the same economies of scale and still have to engineer for peak loads. The barrier to entry is also significantly higher with capital expenditure required and billing and management creates some overhead. However, significant operational efficiency and quickness advantages can be achieved even by small organisations and server consolidation and virtualization rollouts are already in progress. Amazon.com was the first such provider, modernising its data centers which, like most computer networks were using as little as 10% of its capacity at any one time just to leave room for occasional spikes. This allowed small, fast-moving groups to add new features faster and easier, and they went on to open it up to outsiders as Amazon Web Services in 2002 on a utility computing basis.
The companies listed in the "Components" section are providers.
User.
A user is a consumer of "cloud computing". The privacy of users in cloud computing has become of increasing concern. The rights of users is also an issue, which is being addressed via a community effort to create a bill of rights ().
