Crack (or crack cocaine) is an Illegal drug which is made from cocaine. Cocaine is an illegal drug that comes from the leaves of a plant called coca. When people smoke crack, they have a feeling called "being high."
It is illegal to make, sell, and use Crack in most countries. When crack is smoked, it stimulates the nervous system and make a person feel excited, full of energy, and happy, a feeling called "being high."
Crack is made by turning cocaine into little crystals or "rocks." Both cocaine and crack are very addictive. This means that if a person starts taking the drug, they will want to keep taking it, and it will be hard to stop. It can cause a heart attack.
Dangers of using crack.
If people use crack, they may take too much and get sick or even die. This is called an "overdose" (taking too much). As well, when people take crack, they get intoxicated (like being drunk on alcohol). When a person is intoxicated, they can get hurt if they drive a car or a boat. As well, when a person is intoxicated, they may do dangerous things, such as have unsafe sex with a person that they do not know, or get into a violent fight with a person.
Crack is a very addictive drug. This means that if a person starts taking the drug, they will want to keep taking it, and it will be hard to stop, even if the drug is making a person sick (ill). When a person is addicted to a drug, they do bad or criminal acts to get money for more drugs, such as crimes (for example theft, robbery, fraud, or prostitution).
Another danger from using crack is infection with dangerous diseases such as AIDS or Hepatitis C. When a person is smoking crack, a person can get an AIDS or Hepatitis C infection from having unsafe sex with a person that they do not know.
Crack also leads to use of other drugs such as Cocaine or Heroin, leading to even greater dangers.
Trying to quit Crack is very hard because it causes you to be very sick for weeks at a time.
Crack does not have a physical withdrawal, only physical. You will not get sick after stopping but overcoming the urges will be very difficult.
