Classical music, in its orchestral form, usually focuses on stringed instruments. Violins, violas, cellos, and double basses are all string instruments; together, a balanced group of these instruments makes an "orchestra". An orchestra has a conductor who sets the tempo (speed), and directs the orchestra with gestures while they play a piece, or a song.
For some pieces, a "symphonic orchestra" is needed. A symphonic orchestra is made up of stringed instruments, brass instruments, percussion (such as drums), and woodwinds. Brass instruments include the trumpet, trombone, french horn, and tuba. Woodwind instruments include the clarinet, flute, oboe and bassoon.
Classical music also exists in a "chamber" form. Small groups of players (up to 10) play in smaller rooms without a conductor. Lots of classical music is for very small combinations; single players on many instruments including the piano, duets for two players, trios for three and quartets for four players. The string quartet (two violins, one viola and one cello) is a very well-established type of quartet.
Voices often appear in classical music; in opera (staged drama set to music) and oratorio (like opera but without staging) and in songs, either with orchestral or chamber accompaniment. Classical music has a strong relationship with the church - it is true to say that all classical music can trace its roots back either to the need to dance and celebrate or the need to praise God.
Unlike rock and roll or pop music, classical music is not aimed at teenagers. In its roots and still today it can be argued, classical music is aimed towards people of a high social-economical class. It usually needs longer concentration than popular music, mainly because it tends to happen in longer chunks. It would be wrong to say that classical music only appeals to more sophisticated, older people. Some children as young as eight years of age play and appreciate classical music.
20th century.
In the 20th century, classical music changed a lot. From 1950, electronics began to be used to create new sounds, and electric instruments also began to feature sometimes. Since 1970, composers have tended to blur the dividing lines between rock, pop, classical, folk, jazz and world music, drawing on lots of starting-points to develop new material.
