Cellulite is a dimpled appearance of the skin, these are irregular fat cells and toxins trapped under the skin which the body has failed to eliminate. 90% of women around the world experience cellulite during their life. It is more common for a woman to develop cellulite on the thighs, buttocks and the abdomen. Cellulite often appears in women and is rarely seen in men.
Cellulite is not related to cellulitis which is a spreading bacterial infection of the skin.
Cellulite has nothing to do with being overweight, slim people as well as overweight ones can be affected. In fact, many slim women have cellulite.
Genetics.
There are numerous causes of cellulite, such as genes and heredity; genes are the actual cause of cellulite. Some people simply have more fat cells, weak veins, fragile lymphatic vessels, poor circulation or hormonal sensitivity.
Hormonal factors.
Hormones are one of the main causes of cellulite. Cellulite is developed during the hormonal changes like puberty, menopause and pregnancy, and it also tends to worsen with age.
Lifestyle.
An unhealthy lifestyle also leads to cellulite formation. Smoking; lack of exercise; tight clothes; high heeled shoes; an inactive lifestyle; medication, diet pills, oral contraceptives, birth control pills; high stress lifestyle, anxiety and depression are the principal causes of cellulite development.
Diet.
A healthy diet plays a dominant role in a person’s life. A poor diet consisting of processed foods, alcohol and caffeine; crash diet; dehydration, increase the chance of cellulite formation.
1st stage.
Although the blood circulation is impaired, there are no visible changes in the initial stage.
2nd stage.
Blood circulation is lessened even more. The dimpled appearance of the skin is not visible yet, only after skin compression or muscular contraction roughness to the skin becomes visible.
3rd stage.
All 2nd stage symptoms are present. A dimpled skin appearance is evident even at rest. The skin shows palpable sensation; pain to palpation; decreased elasticity; lack of colour in the skin and lower temperature. The skin has a visible rough; dimpled; wavy appearance.
4th stage.
All 3rd stage symptoms are present with more visible and painful dimples on the skin. Because of the poor circulation the skin may be cold to the touch. In this stage it is very hard, sometimes impossible, to get rid of cellulite.
Treatment.
There are numerous therapies for cellulite reduction. None of them promise total and permanent cellulite removal. Mesotherapy; Thalassotherapy; Endermologie; Pressotherapy; Liposuction are some of the used therapies.
Spa-procedure; Aromatherapy; contrast shower; body wraps; vacuum cup massage; honey massage; dry body brushing are some of the many treatments for cellulite reduction.
A well balanced diet and exercise is another way to improve cellulite appearance, combined with other cellulite procedure. Any cellulite reduction method require continual follow-up.
