Cecilia Cheung is a Hong Kong-born Australian actress and C-pop singer. She is wife of Nicholas Tse and daughter-in-law of Patrick Tse and Deborah Lee. She and Nicholas have a son Lucas.
Biography.
Cheung was born in Hong Kong to a Chinese father and a Chinese-British mother. Her parents divorced when she was just a child, after which she was sent to Australia to live with her aunt. Cheung has an elder half-sister, two younger brothers and a younger half-brother from her father's side of the family.
In 1998, while helping a hair stylist friend at a catwalk show, she was offered to appear in a TV CM advertising lemon tea. Later, Cheung made her movie debut as a young nightclub hostess in Stephen Chow's "King of Comedy" in 1999, followed soon after by "Fly Me to Polaris". Her role in "Fly Me to Polaris" got her the award for Best Newcomer at the Hong Kong Film Awards. In the same year, Cheung launched her singing career with her first C-pop album "Any Weather".
For Derek Yee's romance-drama "Lost in Time (movie)" (2003), Cheung won the Best Actress award at the Hong Kong Film Awards. She played a young woman who lost her fiancé in a traffic accident which left her as a grieving single mother struggling to make ends meet.
Cheung has been linked to Hong Kong singer-actor Edison Chen and has also dated another Hong Kong singer-actor Daniel Chan. She then dated Nicholas Tse in early 2002, but they split up late that year. Later she was rumored to have dated a younger Lu Siyuan before the relationship ended in 2003. Cheung suffered serious depression and eating disorder after the break up.
Cheung and Tse were first reported to be "getting back together" in early 2006 and on July 31 that year, Tse officially admitted dating Cheung in an interview with Commercial Radio Hong Kong 881/903. In September the same year, Tse showed off his wedding ring at the Hong Kong International Airport, announcing he and Cheung had been married in a secret wedding ceremony in the Philippines.
On 8 January 2007 episode of TVB's "Entertainment Scoop (東張西望)", Cheung was publicly confirmed by Nicholas' father, Patrick Tse to be approximately three months pregnant with the couple's first child. A March episode of "Entertainment Scoop (東張西望)" said that their child is due in August. It is confirmed by Nicholas Tse that she is expecting a baby boy.
On 2 August, it was reported that Cheung and Tse were both in the maternity ward awaiting for their child to be born. However no specific photo was enclosed with such report. The very next day, Cecilia gave birth to a baby boy named Lucas.
2008 Edison Chen Photo scandal.
In January and February 2008 many explicit photos were found online involving Cecilia Cheung and Edison Chen. The scandal also involved Gillian Chung and Bobo Chan.
