CoCo Lee (born 17 January 1975) is a Chinese pop, dance and urban contemporary singer. Her real name is Ferren Lee-Kelly and 李美林 Lǐ Měi Lín in Chinese (although she also uses the stage name 李玟 Lǐ Wen when she writes songs). She sings Cantonese, Mandarin and English.
Biography.
CoCo Lee was born in Hong Kong. Her father died when she was young, and CoCo moved at age 10 with her mother, step-father and sisters to California, United States. She went through school while trying out her singing voice and she followed her older sisters in entering many local singing contests. CoCo Lee went to high school in San Francisco, California. CoCo later went for a short time to the University of California. CoCo is close to her mother, who has at times managed her career.
After Lee's high school graduation in 1993, she went on holiday in Hong Kong, probably seeing her two sisters Carol and Nancy Lee take part in the Miss Hong Kong Pageant, and while there, she became runner-up in the 12th Annual New Talent Singing Awards. The following day, the local record label Fancy Pie Records contacted her.
Record companies.
CoCo Lee was working with Fancy Pie Records from 1994 to 1995, recording four albums with them. She later signed with another record company in 1996 by Sony Music, who has continued to represent her ever since.
World fame.
CoCo sang the song "A Love Before Time" for the action-drama movie "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon". People around the world could see her when she sang this song live at the 2001 Academy Awards ceremony.
In 2002, CoCo was the star singer at a Houston Rockets basketball game. She became the first East Asian singer to ever sing the American National Anthem at a major world sporting event.
Aside from her fame in singing Mandarin music, CoCo's English-language songs have also become famous. Her love song "Before I Fall In Love" was included in the soundtrack of the romance movie "Runaway Bride".
She was invited by Andrew Lloyd Webber to sing "Phantom of the Opera" in China.
Also, Walt Disney Pictures hired her to sing the title song and be the voice of the heroine Fa Mulan in the Mandarin version of "Mulan". She recorded the song "Reflections", which she also sang at the 2005 opening of the Hong Kong Disneyland A "Reflections" PV was also filmed. She also sang an English version.
CoCo has been getting into acting part-time. She co-starred in the Chinese comedy movie "Master of Everything (Bamboo Shoot)" with John Lone, which won the Best Foreign Film award at the 2005 Beverly Hills Film Festival. While in character within the movie, she sings one of her own songs, "Di-Da-Di".
In the world of fashion, CoCo was an Omega Global Ambassador in 2004, and Chanel named CoCo its first "Asian-Pacific Celebrity Ambassadress." She got her nickname "CoCo" from being an admirer of CoCo Chanel.
In June 2005, CoCo's engagement to Canadian millionaire businessman Bruce Rockowitz was made public, although it seems to have happened some months earlier. Even though Rockowitz is 18 years older than she, her mother approved the marriage.
Current career.
As of 2007, CoCo has not yet broken the American market with a big smash hit single - her English albums have sold moderately. Her hit single, "Do You Want My Love", is still popular at discos and some Internet radio stations.
CoCo is now working on a new album, which she plans to release in 2007. CoCo will return to the San Francisco bay area for a live concert at the Shoreline Amphitheatre on 22 September 2007 with special guest Alex To. It will be her first live performance in her hometown in several years.
