The companions or assistants of the Doctor of the "Doctor Who" television series.
The Doctor is an alien, a "Time Lord" from the planet Gallifrey. He travels in his space-time-ship TARDIS, with which he can go anywhere in time and space. The Doctor usually takes other people with him, who are usually called "companions" or "assistants". The Doctor and his companions travel through space and time, have a lot of adventures, and often save many people.
The character of the companion was there so that the people watching the series could identify and feel close to a character. The companions were often present-time humans, so people could feel close to them, and they knew as much as the viewers. Because of this, the Doctor could explain things to his companions, and at the same time to the viewers.
Almost all the Doctor's companions have been human, or human-looking aliens. Two companions were robots.
Companions are named under the Doctors they travelled with, and sorted by first appearance.
Susan Foreman.
Susan Foreman (Carole Ann Ford) was the Doctor's granddaughter. She travelled with him from the beginning. In "The Dalek Invasion of Earth", Susan stays in 22nd century London.
Barbara Wright.
Barbara Wright (Jacqueline Hill) is one of the first companions of the Doctor. Barbara is a history teacher at the Coal Hill School, working with science teacher Ian Chesterton.
In "An Unearthly Child", set in 1963, Susan Foreman, the granddaughter of the Doctor, is one of their students. Susan is unusually intelligent and knows very much of science and history. Because Susan seems very strange, Barbara and Ian follow the "unearthly child" home to the TARDIS, where they meet the Doctor. With him they begin to travel through space and time.
In "The Chase", after two years of travelling with the Doctor, Barbara and Ian use a Dalek time machine to return to London.
Ian Chesterton.
Ian Chesterton (William Russell) is one of the first companions of the Doctor. Ian is a science teacher at the Coal Hill School, working with history teacher Barbara Wright.
In "An Unearthly Child", set in 1963, Susan Foreman, the granddaughter of the Doctor, is one of their students. Susan is unusually intelligent and knows very much of science and history. Because Susan seems very strange, Barbara and Ian follow the "unearthly child" home to the TARDIS, where they meet the Doctor. With him they begin to travel through space and time.
In "The Chase", after two years of travelling with the Doctor, Barbara and Ian use a Dalek time machine to return to London.
Vicki.
Vicki (Maureen O'Brien) was a companion of the First Doctor. She first appeared in "The Rescue". Vicki was a survivor of a spaceship crash in the 25th century. In "The Myth Makers", Vicki fell in love with a warrior from ancient Troy, and decided to stay with him.
Steven Taylor.
Steven Taylor (Peter Purves) was a companion of the First Doctor. He first appeared in "The Chase", where he had crash-landed his spaceship on the planet two years before. In "The Savages", Steven stays behind to help the local people.
Katarina.
Katarina (Adrienne Hill) was a companion of the First Doctor. She was a handmaiden of Cassandra in ancient Troy, and appeared first in "The Myth Makers". During "The Daleks' Master Plan", Katarina is captured by the prisoner Kirksen. She opens the airlock in which she and her captor are, which kills them both.
Sara Kingdom.
Sara Kingdom (Jean Marsh) appeared in the "The Daleks' Master Plan". She is sometimes counted as a companion of the First Doctor, but sometimes not.
Dodo Chaplet.
Dorothea "Dodo" Chaplet (Jackie Lane) was a companion of the First Doctor. She appeared first at the end of "The Massacre of St Bartholomew's Eve". In "The War Machines", Dodo decides to stay in 1966 London.
Polly.
Polly (Anneke Wills) was a companion of the First and Second Doctor. She, together with Ben Jackson, appeared first in "The War Machines". In "The Faceless Ones" they return to 1966 London, and Polly and Ben decide to stay.
Ben Jackson.
Ben Jackson (Michael Craze) was a companion of the First and Second Doctor. He, together with Polly, appeared first in "The War Machines". In "The Faceless Ones" they return to 1966 London, and Polly and Ben decide to stay.
Jamie McCrimmon.
James Robert McCrimmon, or simply Jamie, (Frazer Hines) was a companion of the Second Doctor. Jamie was from 18th century Scotland. Jamie first appears in "The Highlanders", where he meets the Doctor, Ben and Polly after the Battle of Culloden in 1746. At the end of "The War Games", the Time Lords take Jamie's and Zoe's memories away, and send each of them back to their original time and place.
Victoria Waterfield.
Victoria Waterfield (Deborah Watling) was a companion of the Second Doctor. She is from Victorian England in 1866, and she is the daughter of scientist Edward Waterfield (played by John Bailey). She first appears in "The Evil of the Daleks". In "Fury from the Deep", Victoria leaves the Doctor and Jamie, and stays with a family named Harris in the 20th century.
Zoe Heriot.
Zoe Heriot (Wendy Padbury) was a companion of the Second Doctor. She first appears in "The Wheel in Space", on a space station in the 21st century. At the end of "The War Games", the Time Lords take Zoe's and Jamie's memories away, and send each of them back to their original time and place.
Liz Shaw.
Liz Shaw (Caroline John) was a companion of the Third Doctor. She was a scientist and civilian member of UNIT. She first appeared in "Spearhead from Space", where she became a member of UNIT and met the newly regenerated Doctor. In "Inferno" Liz decided to leave the Doctor and UNIT, and go back to the University of Cambridge.
Jo Grant.
Jo Grant (Katy Manning) was a companion of the Third Doctor. She first appears in "Terror of the Autons" as a replacement assistant for the Doctor. In "The Green Death", Jo falls in love with the scientist Professor Clifford Jones. She decides to marry Jones, and goes with him to the Amazon Rainforest.
Harry Sullivan.
Harry Sullivan (Ian Marter) was a companion of the Fourth Doctor. Harry is a doctor in the Royal Navy, and works as a medical officer for the United Nations Intelligence Taskforce. In "Terror of the Zygons", Harry leaves the Doctor and returns to London. Harry appears again once in "The Android Invasion".
Leela.
Leela (Louise Jameson) was a companion of the Fourth Doctor. She first appeared in "The Face of Evil". Leela was a warrior of the savage Sevateem tribe. The Sevateem tribe were the descendants of the crew of an Earth ship, that crash landed on an unnamed planet in the far future. In "The Invasion of Time", Leela falls in love with Andred, a Gallifreyan. Leela chooses to stay with Andred on the Doctor's home planet Gallifrey. K-9 Mark I stays with her.
K-9.
K-9 (voiced by John Leeson) was a robot dog and a companion of the Fourth Doctor. There have been several models: K-9 Mark I-IV.
The original K-9 Mark I was given to the Doctor, but later stayed with the Doctor's companion Leela on Gallifrey.
K-9 Mark III and Mark IV were presents of the Doctor to Sarah Jane Smith.
Adric.
Adric (Matthew Waterhouse) was a companion of the Fourth and Fifth Doctor. He was from the planet Alzarius in the parallel universe E-Space, but came with the Doctor to our universe. Adric dies in "Earthshock", when the spaceship he is on crashes into prehistoric Earth.
Tegan Jovanka.
Tegan Jovanka (Janet Fielding) was a companion of the Fourth and Fifth Doctor. Tegan was an Australian stewardess.
Nyssa of Traken.
Nyssa of Traken (Sarah Sutton) was a companion of the Fourth and Fifth Doctor. Nyssa was an alien from the planet Traken.
Vislor Turlough.
Vislor Turlough (Mark Strickson) was a companion of the Fifth Doctor. Turlough was an alien from the planet Trion. After a civil war he had been exiled to Earth, to the Brendon Public School. In "Mawdryn Undead" he met the Doctor and joined him. In "Planet of Fire", Turlough left and returned to his home planet Trion.
Kamelion.
Kamelion (voiced by Gerald Flood) was a shape-changing android and a companion of the Fifth Doctor. He first appears in "The King's Demons", where he is controlled by the Master. The Doctor frees him an takes Kamelion with him. In "Planet of Fire", Kamelion is destroyed.
Peri Brown.
Peri Brown (Nicola Bryant) was a companion of the Fifth and Sixth Doctor. She first appears in "Planet of Fire", after which she travels with the Doctor. After the Doctor regenerates, Peri stays and travels with the Sixth Doctor.
Melanie Bush.
Melanie "Mel" Bush (Bonnie Langford) was a companion of the Sixth and Seventh Doctor. She was a computer programmer from the 20th century England. Mel leaves the Doctor at the end of "Dragonfire", to stay on Iceworld with Sabalom Glitz.
Ace.
Ace, real name Dorothy, (Sophie Aldred) was a companion of the Seventh Doctor. She first appears in "Dragonfire", on the planet Iceworld, although Ace was from 20th century Earth. At the end of this story, Melanie Bush leaves the Doctor, who invites Ace to come with him. Ace stays the Doctor's companion until the first end of the series in 1989.
Grace Holloway.
Dr. Grace Holloway (Daphne Ashbrook) was the Doctor's companion in the 1996 television movie "Doctor Who". Grace is a cardiologist from 1999 San Francisco. She accidentally kills the Seventh Doctor during an operation. Grace helps the Eighth Doctor fight the Master. In the end of the film, the Eighth Doctor invites Grace to travel with him, but she says that she will stay on Earth.
Adam Mitchell.
Adam Mitchell (Bruno Langley) was the Doctor's companion for only two episodes.
In 2012, Adam was a young English researcher, employed by the American billionaire Henry van Statten. In the episode "Dalek" he was at van Statten's base, and at the end he went with the Doctor in the TARDIS. In "The Long Game" he is travelling with the Doctor and Rose, but Adam behaves badly. At the end of the episode, the Doctor takes Adam home.
Mickey Smith.
Mickey Smith (Noel Clarke) was Rose Tyler's boyfriend. He helped Rose and the Ninth Doctor several times. Later he travelled with the Tenth Doctor and Rose. At the end of "The Age of Steel", Mickey decided to stay in the parallel world to help fight the Cybermen. In "Journey's End", Mickey returned to this world, and at the end decided to stay here again.
Astrid Peth.
Astrid Peth (Kylie Minogue) was the Doctor's companion during the 2007 Christmas special "Voyage of the Damned". She is from the planet Sto. Astrid is a waitress on the starship "Titanic". Astrid helps the Doctor, but is killed while she saves him. After saving the "Titanic", the Doctor realises that Astrid was still wearing a teleporter bracelet when she died. He tries to bring her back to life, but it does not work not fully: Astrid now is a ghost-like energy being. In the end, the Doctor sends Astrid away to fly through the universe.
