"Danny Phantom" is an animated television series on the Nickelodeon cable network. This show, and another Nicktoon, "The Fairly OddParents", were created by American animator Butch Hartman.
The show Danny Phantom is about a fourteen-year old boy named Danny Fenton. His parents, Jack Fenton and Maddie Fenton, are ghost hunters and also create machines that help them to catch ghosts. Danny's parents were creating a portal, but when they were finished and tried to make it work, it failed to work and they quit. Danny, however, who had been watching them, put on a white suit and went inside the machine out of curiosity. He accidentally pressed a button and got an electric shock, which gave him his ghost powers.
Only his friends, Samantha (often called Sam) and Tucker know about his powers. Later Danny's sister, Jasmine (often called Jazz) accidentally discovered and learned about his powers.
Invisibility: Danny can turn invisible and back.
Ghost ray: Danny can shoot a green beam of energy from his hand.
Ghost Wail: Danny can make a very loud yell, sending green sound waves out of his mouth which
destroy almost anything in his path. He barely uses this because it uses too much energy.
Force Field: Danny can protect himself against attacks by creating a green bubble-like dome around him.
Characters.
Danny Fenton - a fourteen-year-old boy who has ghost powers. He doesn't do well in school and is often bullied by Dash.
Samantha (Sam) Manson - A teenage girl who is one of Danny's best friends. She can be bossy sometimes.
Tucker Foley - A teenage boy who is one of Danny's best friends. He is smart and carries around gadgets. He also wears glasses.
Jack Fenton - Danny's father. He is clumsy but is good at making machines. Although a little bit dumb sometimes, he really does care about his family.
Maddie Fenton - Danny's mother. She also enjoys making machines with her husband.
Jazzmine (Jazz) Fenton - Danny's older teenage sister. She is smart and is sometimes against her parent's ghost hunting.
Dash - A teenage boy in Danny's school who likes to bully Danny. Recently, however, Danny has been able to avoid this. Dash is a very popular kid in the school.
Mr. Lancer - One of Danny, Jazz and Dash's teachers.
Kwan - One of Dash's friends who is also popular.
Vlad Plasmius - Vlad is one of Jack's old friends. He too also has ghost powers, but he is more powerful than Danny.
Guys in White - This is a small group in the show. They are ghost hunters.
Other Facts.
Danny Phantom is distributed outside the United States by the Canadian company, Nelvana.
Danny's school is called Casper High.
In the show, there are also characters called Guys in White. This is an obvious joke of Men in Black.
"Danny Phantom" was originally called "Danny Phantom and the Spector Detectors", but the creator thought that the show would be more interesting if the ghost was a teenage boy, so he changed it to "Danny Phantom".
