Digital Divide is the name of the gap, in a branch of technology, between parts of the world where technologies as internet, mobile phones, computers, wi-fi there are, and the parts of the world where there aren't.
Problems.
Digital Divide can born for many problems like socioeconomic problems (few people are rich and lots are poor), racial problems (there is a majority or a minority that control the other), or geographical problems (in the cities there are technologies but there aren't in rural areas).
Examples in culture.
An example of Digital Divide we can see if we think about countries as Canada, the United States, Japan, South Korea, Western Europe and North Europe and Australasia,where there are big internet connection developments, or where technologies are cheaps, and after we think about Latin America, Africa, and Southeast Asia,where there are many social problems and where technologies has a long way before to get interest in those countries, for problems as, price of technology, and sometimes because there isn't resources for help it. The Digital Divide is a big problem for the world, because it help others problems, and probability the richer part of the world will be always more richest, and the poor part, always more poorest.
Inner conflict.
In some parts of world there is a large Digital divide. Sometimes it is just in half of a country, or just a region, for example Africa. There are big cities were technologies are really cheap and there are lots of villages and rural communities where there is no technology. In this case the Digital Divide creates others problems. Because a part of the country is rich and another part is poor there are often problems with trading and connections.
Opposition.
Many rich countries (for example, Canada, United States, Japan, Italy, France, United Kingdom) send old computers or make charity projects by no-profit associations or communities or projects for the school in poor countries, as One Laptop Per Child, for to fight the digital divide and for making a culture about internet and about others technologies.
