The Daleks are a fictional alien race of mutants from the British science fiction television series "Doctor Who". Daleks are aliens from the planet Skaro, integrated within a tank-like mechanical casing. The creatures are a powerful race who always wanted universal conquest and domination, they have no pity, compassion or remorse (as all of their emotions were removed except hate).
The Daleks are one of the most powerful races ever in "Doctor Who" history and are the Doctor's worst enemies. They cry "EX-TER-MIN-ATE!" when they are about to kill someone. They come in different colours, like bronze, black, red, white, gold, and silver. They first appeared in the first season episode of the series (in "The Daleks") and they were last seen in the two-part episode "The Stolen Earth"/"Journey's End" (2008). They are not robots, but horrible aliens kept in a metal casing, because they became mutated during a war on their planet, Skaro. They were created by an evil scientist named Davros. They can not be easily hurt by guns as their casing reflects the bullets that come from the gun.e created by writer Terry Nation and designed by BBC designer Raymond Cusick. They were introduced in December 1963 in the second "Doctor Who" serial. From their first apperence they were very popular with viewers, was ment that they were in a lot of later serials and two 1960s motion pictures.
The word "Dalek" has been put into the "Oxford English Dictionary" and other major dictionaries; the "Collins Dictionary" defines it rather broadly as "any of a set of fictional robot-like creations that are aggressive, mobile, and produce rasping staccato speech". Although there is no meaning to their name, "Dalek" sounds like the Norwegian word "dårlig", which means "bad" or "evil". It is also a trademark, having first been registered by the BBC in 1964 to protect its range of Dalek merchandise.
The Daleks were on a postage stamp celebrating British popular culture in 1999, photographed by Lord Snowdon.
Physical characteristics.
on the outside, Daleks resemble human-sized salt and pepper shakers who are five to six feet (152 to 183 cm) tall, with a single robotic eyestalk ontop of a turning dome, an exterminator arm which is a energy weapon (or "death ray"), which looks like an long egg beater or the framework of a paint roller, and in some episodes fired a gas and can also be fitted with a projectile weapon; and a telescoping robot plunger shaped arm.
Movement.
Early versions of the Daleks were rolled around on castors or moved by wheels connected to hand cranks by bicycle chains.
Later versions of the prop had more efficient wheels (from shopping carts, according to a Blue Peter episode) and were simply moved by the seated operators' feet, but they remained so heavy that when going up ramps they often had to be pushed by stagehands out of where the camrea could not see. The difficulty of operating all the prop's parts at once contributed to the occasionally jerky movements of the Dalek. The latest model of the costume still has a human operator within, but the movement of the dome and eyestalk are now remotely controlled so that the operator can concentrate on the smooth movement of the Dalek and its arms.
Fictional history.
Dalek history inside the show has seen many changes, which have caused continuity problems. When the Daleks first appeared in "The Daleks", they were presented as the descendants of the Dals, mutated after a brief nuclear war between the Dal and Thal races. However, in 1975, Terry Nation revised the Daleks' origins in "Genesis of the Daleks", where the Dals were now called Kaleds (of which Daleks is an anagram), and the Dalek design was attributed to one man, the crippled Kaled chief scientist Davros.
Instead of a short nuclear exchange, the Kaled-Thal war was portrayed as a thousand-year-long war, fought with nuclear and other weapons causing widespread mutations among the Kaled race. Davros experimented on living Kaled cells to find the ultimate mutated form of the Kaled species and placed the subjects in "travel machines" whose design was based on his own life-support chair.
"Genesis of the Daleks" marked a new era for the depiction of the species, with most of their previous history either forgotten or barely talked about again.
A single Dalek appeared in "Dalek", written by Robert Shearman, which was broadcast on BBC One on 30 April 2005. This Dalek appeared to be the sole Dalek survivor of a Time War that had destroyed both the Daleks and the Time Lords.
The Dalek Emperor returned at the end of the 2005 series, having rebuilt the Dalek race with human subjects; it saw itself as a god, and the new Daleks were shown worshipping it. These Daleks and their fleet were reduced to subatomic particles in "The Parting of the Ways".
The 2006 series finale "Army of Ghosts"/"Doomsday" saw another squad of Dalek survivors from the old Empire, known as the Cult of Skaro, led by a black Dalek named "Dalek Sec", that had survived the Time War by escaping into the Void between dimensions. They emerged, along with a Time Lord prison containing millions of Daleks, at Canary Wharf due to the actions of the Torchwood Institute and Cybermen from a parallel world, leading to a Cyberman-Dalek clash in London. Eventually, the Tenth Doctor caused both factions to be sucked back into the Void. However, the Cult members (Sec, Caan, Jast, and Thay; it is unusual for a Dalek to have a name) survived by "temporal shifting" away. The two-part story "Daleks in Manhattan"/"Evolution of the Daleks" revealed they had escaped to 1930 New York, setting up base in the Empire State Building. Experiments led by Sec attepted to force a Dalek evolution by combining their DNA with that of humans, and he is the first of the new "Human Daleks". However the three remaining Daleks rebelled and destroyed him. The Cult also attempted to create a Human/Dalek hybrid (fully human in appearance but with Dalek minds). This attempt failed after the Doctor interfered. Caan escaped via another temporal shift.
The Daleks returned in the 2008 series' two-part finale, "The Stolen Earth"/"Journey's End", accompanied once again by their creator Davros (now played by Julian Bleach). It is revealved that Dalek Caan had forced himself back into the Time War, even though it was time-locked (the effort rendered him insane), where he rescued Davros; Davros then created a new army of Daleks from his own flesh. The new Dalek army was led by a Supreme Dalek, who kept Davros imprisoned in a "Vault"; Davros said that he and the Supreme Dalek had reached "an arrangement". Davros and the Daleks planned to destroy all creation with a 'reality bomb', which failed due to the interference of the Doctor and his companions, and due to Caan himself who had been manipulating the events unknown to either side. Though the Daleks were destroyed, the fate of Davros and Dalek Caan is unknown.
