Dan Kelly (1861 - 28 June 1880) was the youngest brother of Australian Bushranger Ned Kelly. He was a member of the Kelly Gang and died during the siege of Glenrowan.
Kelly was born in 1861 at Beveridge, Victoria in a simple wooden house built by his father, John "Red" Kelly. The house is still standing in Kelly Street. John Kelly, an Irishman had been a convict and had been sent to Van Diemen's Land in 1842. He had moved to Victoria after being released from gaol in 1848. He began working as a farmer around Beveridge. He married an Irish girl called Ellen Quinn in Melbourne in 1850.. They had several children, Annie (1853), Ned (1854), Maggie (1856), Jim (1859), Kate (1862) and Grace (1863).
Greta.
In 1864 the family moved north to a farm at Avenel, Victoria. His father died in 1866, and in 1867 the family moved again to a small farm near Greta, Victoria in the King Valley. His mother's family had moved to the area in 1864. His family had always been in trouble with the law. His mother's family were also well known to the police. Dan Kelly first got into trouble with the law when only 10 years old. Dan and his brother Jim, aged 12, were arrested by Constable Flood for riding a horse that did not belong to them. They had been doing some work for a local farmer and he had lent the boys the horse to ride home on. Flood did not believe them and the boys were forced to spend a 2 nights in a gaol cell.
In 1875 Dan Kelly and his cousins, the Lloyds, took on farm work in the Riverina area and on the Monaro High Plains. This was a common work pattern for young men in the area. His group of friends were a wild group of young men, known as "the Greta mob". They were well known for their visits to nearby towns such as Wangaratta, Beechworth and Benalla. On one visit to Benalla in 1876, Dan had been arrested for stealing a saddle. The police let him go when they could get enough evidence. Dan and his cousins got into trouble with the police in October 1877. They were charged with violent assault, damage to property, breaking into houses and stealing items worth 113 ponds. The police weren't able to prove most of the charges. Dan spent 1 month in gaol for damaging property worth 10 pounds.
On April 15, 1878, a policeman new to the area, Constable Fitzpatrick, went to the Kelly's house to arrest Dan Kelly for stealing horses. This is now called the "Fitzpatrick incident" and is covered in detail in the pages on Dan's brother, Ned Kelly. In short, there was a fight with Fitzpatrick. Fitzpatrick claimed the Kelly family had tried to kill him. Dan and Ned went into the bush to hide. Ellen Kelly was put into gaol for attempted murder.
The Kelly Gang.
Ned and Dan Kelly were living in the bush at a remote place in the "Wombat Ranges." Dan Kelly had built a small hut some time earlier on Bullock Creek. He had cleared an area of about 20 acres to grow crops. They had been searching for gold in the creek. He had also built a small still for making alcohol. During the months they were hiding at Bullock Creek, they were often visited by their friends including Steve Hart, Joe Byrne, Aaron Sherritt and the Lloyds. The police took the charge of attempted murder very seriously. A reward of 100 pounds was offered for the capture of the two Kelly boys. The police thought the brothers were hiding in the Wombat ranges. In October 1878 they sent 2 search groups out to find them. One group traveled south from Greta, and the other started from Mansfield and traveled north.
Outlaw.
After the policemen were killed, Dan Kelly was made an outlaw.
Glenrowan.
Dan Kelly died during the seige at Glenrowan. The cause of death is unknown, but Dan and Steve Hart may have killed themselves. Both bodies were badly burned during the fire. Family members and friends took the bodies and they are buried in unmarked graves at Greta. There have been claims that Dan survived the fire and spent the rest of his life in Queensland. There is little evidence to support these claims.
