The Dutch are the people who live in the Netherlands, or those that come from the Netherlands. Often the Netherlands is called Holland, but this is only part of the Netherlands. The Dutch culture and ethnicity are also found outside of the Netherlands, with large number of Dutch living in the United States of America, South Africa, Surinam, Namibië. The Belgian people of Flanders can also be seen as (partly) Dutch.
Many inventors were Dutch, including Hans Lippershey, Hans Janssen, and his son Zacharias Janssen the inventors of the microscope and the telescope, and the incubator. Many famous painters have also been Dutch, among them Rembrandt van Rijn, Vincent van Gogh and Johannes Vermeer.
The definition of the Dutch ethnicity is not always clear. One can count all people living the Netherlands as Dutch, but this is often not the case. This is because many people who live in The Netherlands weren't born there. There are about 15.5 million people in the Netherlands who actually have the Dutch nationality. So about 1 million people living in the Netherlands who don't even have the Dutch nationality. But even more people in the Netherlands weren't born there. According to some definitions, also people who were born in the Netherlands, but who's parents were not, can't be called Dutch. This definition leaves almost 20% of the entire Dutch population to be 'foreign'.
Population growth.
During the last 150 years, the Netherlands saw a relative quick population growth as compared to the rest of Europe. For comparison:The Belgian population grew from 50% more inhabitants in 1850 to a third less in 2000. The population of the Netherlands grew from 3 million in 1850, to 5 million in 1900, to 10 million in 1950, to 16 million in 2000.
Modern Day Society.
The Dutch society in the present can be seen as a very multi-cultural society. About 20% of the entire Dutch population is not of real Dutch origin (these people are called "allochtoon" in Dutch). Even most members of the Dutch Royal family are allochtoon. This comes from the fact that the Netherlands were open to other nationalities and other religions since the Republic of the Netherlands (founded in 1588). In the 17th century, it wasn't odd for for instance muslims to live in Amsterdam. After the Second World War, the Dutch hired many workers from Turkey and Morocco to rebuilt the Netherlands. Many of these guest workers ("gastarbeiders") stayed in the Netherlands. Therefore, The Netherlands have a large Turkish and Moroccan community. Immigration from especially Surinam and Indonesia also lead to the multi-cultural society of the present. Recent events (like the murder on Theo van Gogh by a radical Muslim) have lead to negative views on "allochtonen" by some original Dutch people
The Dutch society is also famous for its liberal views. The Netherlands were the first country to legalize Same-sex marriage (the marriage of homosexuals).The Netherlands have a strong Gay-rights movement. Abortion and euthanasia are also legal in the Netherlands. The Netherlands are also the only country in the world where marijuana and magic mushrooms are (partly) legal.
The Netherlands are one of the busiest countries in the world. Almost 16.5 million people live in the little country, making it very busy. That's why not many Dutch live in villages. Most Dutch live in city's, with a city being a place with at least 25,000 people living there. 8.7 million Dutch live in "agglomerations" (urban areas which are connected to each other, a sort of metropolitan area). That's about 54% of all the Dutch people. About 15% of the Dutch people live in city's which aren't in an agglomeration. The other 30% live in villages (places with less than 25,000 people).
Travel.
The Netherlands are a country where bicycles are used very much. Almost 30% of all travel is done by bicycle in the Netherlands. Bicycles are used so much that thoughtout the Netherlands, hundreds of bicycle paking lots ("fietsenstallingen") are built. In Amsterdam, there even is 3-story high bicycle parking lot. Train also is used very much (unlike in for instance the US). The biggest railway company (NS) has 1.1 million travellers per day. That's 7 percent of the entire Dutch population each day. The Dutch railway system is the second best in the world (after the Japanese one), and it surely is the most busiest in Europe. Students can use the public transport systems for free (that is: train, bus, metro, tram and even boat if needed).
