Dylan Mark Postl (born May 29, 1986) is an American midget wrestler. He is better known by his ring name Hornswoggle. Postl is currently working for World Wrestling Entertainment on its "ECW" brand, where he was the last WWE Cruiserweight Champion ever. Postl originally wrestled under the name of "The World's Sexiest Midget" Shortstack.
2005.
Prior to working on "SmackDown!", Postl was best known for his work with NWA Wisconsin where he won its X Division Championship.
World Wrestling Entertainment.
Postl signed with World Wrestling Entertainment in May 2006. He is the fourth wrestler from NWA Wisconsin to sign with WWE. The others were Daivari, Ken Kennedy and CM Punk.
Postl first showed up as the leprechaun partner of the Irish wrestler Finlay on "SmackDown!" during the May 26 episode. After Finlay’s victory over Paul Burchill, a little man (Postl) crawled out from under the ring and jumped on Burchill. Finlay pulled him off, only to slam him back down onto Burchill again. For the next few weeks the as-yet unnamed man continued to appear from under the ring after matches.
Eventually, "SmackDown!" commentator Michael Cole began calling him the Little Bastard. The name became popular and became his "official" name. Commentator JBL refused to call him "Little Bastard". JBL said, "he "might" have parents". He instead called him a leprechaun. This was confirmed in one edition of "SmackDown!" by Finlay.
Little Bastard soon became meaner. He started attacking during Finlay's matches even though it upset Finlay. Many times, Finlay either physically shoved Little Bastard back under the ring or was forced to tackle him before he could hit the person he was wrestling. At one point, Little Bastard attacked Finlay, biting Finlay when Finlay tried to stop him from attacking Gunner Scott.
Little Bastard was an important part of Finlay winning the United States Championship when he tossed him a shillelagh to knock out champion Lashley to win the match.
On February 23, his name was changed to Hornswoggle on WWE's website and all references to the name "Little Bastard" were removed. The name change became official on the March 2 episode of "SmackDown!". Postl attacked JBL and Michael Cole. Afterwards, Finlay told Cole that Little Bastard's name is Hornswoggle. Despite this, Cole continues to occasionally refer to Hornswoggle as "Little Bastard".
On July 22, 2007 at The Great American Bash Hornswoggle won the WWE Cruiserweight Championship. The other people in the match and commentators did not know that he was a participant in the match until the pin and he was given the belt. This made him the first person with dwarfism to win a Championship in WWE history. Hornswoggle is both the lightest and the shortest wrestler to win the Cruiserweight Championship in WWE history. He is also the smallest wrestler to win any title in WWE.
Postl was drafted to ECW on June 25, 2008 as part of the 2008 WWE Supplemental Draft.
