Death penalty, also called capital punishment is when a government or state executes (kills) someone, usually because he or she has done a serious crime.
The death penalty is a very disputed and controversial topic.
About half the countries in the world have a death penalty, the other half do not. The United States, The People's Republic of China and Japan and Iran are examples of countries that have a death penalty. Canada, Australia and most European countries are examples of countries without a death penalty.
Over half the countries in the world have abolished the death penalty in law and practice: 75 countries have abolished the capital punishment for all crimes and another 20 can be considered abolitionist in practice. The latter retain the death penalty in law but have not carried out any executions for the past 10 years or more.
Most of the countries that have a death penalty use it on murderers, and for other serious crimes such as rape or terrorism. Other countries especially ones with Authoritarian or Totalitarian governments, however, also use it for more minor crimes like theft, or for saying bad things about the government.
Forms of execution.
Whenever the word "death penalty" comes up, extremists from both sides start yelling out their arguments. One side says the death penalty is good because it scares people away from doing things that could get them executed, the other side says there's a potential of executing an innocent man; one says justice, retribution, and punishment; the other side says that execution is murder. Most people know the threat of crime to their lives, but the question lies in the methods and action that should be used to deal with it. Throughout human history, governments and rulers have used many death penalty methods to execute people, such as crucifixion, flaying, and hanging. Some methods, such as crucifixion and flaying are are no longer used by governments, because people think that these methods of killing are too cruel. The gas chamber was found unconstitutional in the United States (that is: against the US constitution forbidding "cruel and unusual punishments") and is no longer used.
The following forms of execution are in use today.
