Daft Punk is a band from France. There are two people in the band, Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo (born February 8, 1974) and Thomas Bangalter (born January 3, 1975). Daft Punk use computers to make their music.
How the members met and Darlin' era.
Both of the two Daft Punk's members studied in the same Lycée in Paris.
They became friends and recorded a demo track with other students from the school. Thomas Bangalter played bass while Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo played guitar.
They formed a band called Darlin' and the tracks that this band did were released by Stereolab.
The Darlin' experience didn't last very long and after a show they performed in the United Kingdom, a newspaper qualified the music of Thomas and Guy-Manuel as "daft punk" (silly punk music).
Thomas and Guy-Manuel were amused by this nickname and officially adopted it, and that's how they became the well known Daft Punk.
First Album: Homework.
In 1995, Daft Punk began to record in the studio a song called Da Funk which became their first commercial success.
After that success, Daft Punk looked for a manager, and the chose Pedro Winter aka Busy P.
The idea of Homework debuted when Daft Punk signed with Virgin Records.
That album became one of the most essential electro albums of the nineties after that it had been released in 1997.
Second Album: Discovery.
In 1999, Daft Punk returned to recording studio to work on Discovery which will be their second album and their second success.
Discovery reached the second place on the UK Charts.
One more time their first single from Discovery, became a giant hit around the globe and Daft Punk became definitely one of the most talented electro musician.
Daft Punk used many samples (little sounds from other songs) to compose songs like Face to Face, Too long and Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger.
Third Album: Human After all.
2004. Daft Punk spent six weeks on their third album.
Human after all was a subject of controversy, concerning some aggressive aspects in songs like Technologic.
De Homem-Christo and Bangalter only said:"we believe that Human after all speaks for itself".
