Dean Martin (born Dino Crocetti June 17, 1917 - December 25, 1995) was an American singer and actor. He was one of the most popular artists in the 1950s. Martin's career as a singer really began when he met comedian Jerry Lewis at a club and they decided to team up as a comedy-music pair. They became successful at clubs and then acted in the film "My Friend Irma" which made them famous. They worked together for ten years, had a popular radio show, and made more movies. Martin became a huge success on his own when he sang "That's Amore", and his partnership with Lewis ended in July 1956.
Martin was also part of the Rat Pack, a group of entertainers (musicians and actors), in the 1950s and 1960s, whose unofficial "leader" was Frank Sinatra. (Sinatra personally called the group "The Summit".) They made movies and performed live shows together, many in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Martin later had his own television show, and made recordings for Reprise Records, a record label started by Frank Sinatra. At the height of the rock and roll era, Martin still had hit records, and his "Everybody Loves Somebody Sometime" even knocked The Beatles off the top of the "Billboard" sales charts.
Martin made movies on his own, which were mostly comedies. Four of them starred him as "Matt Helm", a spy in the manner of James Bond. Martin also appeared in dramatic movies, like "Rio Bravo" and "Airport". When he sang onstage or on television, he always had a cocktail glass with him, and most people thought he was drinking whiskey as he performed. It turned out he actually drank apple juice the whole time. Offstage, Martin enjoyed Jack Daniels whiskey, and red wine.
His television show was cancelled in 1975, but he continued on television with "The Dean Martin Celebrity Roasts", a series of specials that mocked celebrity testimonial dinners. Other comedians and actors would appear, and instead of praising the guest of honor, would make fun of them. None of the mocking was serious, though, and everyone usually had fun at the roasts. The specials ran until 1984.
Martin was more or less retired in the late 1980s, though he did record a new collection of his best songs, which were sold through television commercials. In early 1987, his son Dean Paul ("Dino") Martin was in the United States Air Force, and his airplane crashed during a mission. His body was later recovered. Losing Dean Paul broke Martin's spirit, and he never seemed happy after that.
Martin joined Sinatra and other Rat Packers for a reunion tour, but his heart was not in it, and he quit after just a few shows. Sinatra was very angry, and the two did not speak for years. They later made their peace, after members of the Rat Pack began to die off. Martin lived in retirement, watching movies at home, and going for dinner at a nearby restaurant.
During the 1990s, Martin developed emphysema from years of cigarette smoking, and had trouble with his liver also. His health became bad, and he began to think about death. He and his wife Jeanne were divorced years earlier, but had remained close. She encouraged him not to worry about dying, and to think about his parents, and their son Dean Paul, waiting for him.
Martin died over the Christmas holidays in 1995, watching television in bed. As a tribute, the lights on the Las Vegas Strip were dimmed for one minute, in his memory. His epitaph was the title of his best-remembered song: "EVERYBODY LOVES SOMEBODY SOMETIME".
