The Eucharist, also called holy communion, the sacrament, or the Lord's Supper, is a kind of religious ritual in many Christian churches. It started when Jesus Christ told his followers to eat bread and drink wine in memory of him, at the Last Supper.
According to the Roman Catholic Church, the Eucharist is the true presence of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. During a mass, through the act of transubstantiation, the bread and wine offered change, and are no longer bread and wine. They truly become the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. The bread and wine do not change appearance, but they truly are the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which Catholics in good standing (not in the state of mortal sin) come and receive Christ--they consume Him. This follows what was said by Christ "Eat my Body and Drink my Blood".
Many Protestant churches believe that this was meant to be simply a symbol. However the Catholic Church bases its beliefs off of the tradition handed down through the hierarchy of the church. It is also based off of John 6 (the bread of life discourse), where Christ says "eat my body" and "drink my blood." The literal translation from the Greek is "Gnaw on my flesh". When some of the Jewish people listening to this message in the bible are weirded out and leave, Jesus does not try and stop them. He just keeps talking. This shows us that he truly meant for us to "Drink his Blood" and "gnaw on his flesh".
In most Protestant churches the sacrament of holy communion also involves eating small wafers and drinking wine, but do not believe that it is the actual body and blood of Jesus. They do, however, see it as a very important symbol.
In the Latter Day Saints or "Mormon" Church, followers eat small pieces of bread and drink water. They believe that this is a symbol of the body and blood of Jesus, and they call it the Sacrament. They also believe that it helps them to make the promises of baptism all over again.
In other Christian churches, the Eucharist may be different. Some churches offer it daily, others weekly, some once a month.
