In the study of life and living things, evolution is the term used to describe the way a type of living thing changes over a long period of time. "Evolution" is a scientific theory (an explanation) that is used by scientists to explain why different creatures and plants are the way that they are, and act the way that they do.
When scientists look at living creatures, they often see that changes have happened to the shape or the behaviour of a group of creatures. For example, lizards, monkeys, humans and many other creatures have five "digits" (fingers and toes) on each limb. But some creatures have four, some have three, some have two and some have only one. The creatures that have less than five digits often have a sign that they used to have more. It might be two extra little toes, too high up to walk on, or it might be just a bump on the side of the leg, where the animal's ancestors had another toe. A horse has a single hoof on each foot, a cow has two, a bird has its whole arm changed into a wing, and a human has a hand. But if we look at fossils - made when very old dead things got squashed between clay or sand, which hardened into rocks, we can see all these animals were once one type of animal: Fishes. The fossils show the animals slowly getting different from each other, and dividing into more and more types of animals. They look different now because they changed in different ways: That is evolution.
Scientists can see that changes have happened. They have happened very slowly over a long time. Scientists try to explain why these changes have happened. The idea that many scientists use to explain the changes is the "theory of evolution".
Organism.
An organism is a living thing. Organisms are all the different types of living things, including bacteria, plants, eggs, fungi, trees, insects, different kinds of animals and human beings. Scientists who study evolution are interested in looking at the changes to all sorts of different types of organism.
Traits.
Every living thing, from tiny organisms like bacteria, to plants, animals and humans, has particular "traits". The living thing is constructed (made) in a certain way; this is its physical structure or body. The physical structure "works" in a certain way; this is its "function", the way its body works. The living thing also acts in a certain way; this is its behaviour. The way that a living thing is structured, the way its body works and the way that it acts are all "traits". Some "traits" are shared by all the members of the group, but other traits are only shared by a small number.
Genetic traits.
The traits of a particular person are of two types, the ones that they inherit through their parents, and the ones that are caused by outside forces. Their height, the colour of their eyes and ability (being able to do some things) are "hereditary" (inherited through their parents). Some of a person's traits, like their scars and their haircut, are caused by outside forces. All these things are traits of a particular person, but only the "hereditary" traits are studied when looking at evolution. The hereditary traits are passed on to the person through their genes. Their genes contain the whole bundle of traits that they inherit through their parents.
Generations.
"Generation" is a word that is used in describing how traits are inherited, or passed on through a family. A "generation" is the people (or other living organism) that is on a particular level of the family tree. A person and their brothers and sisters are one generation. They have come from their parents, who are an earlier generation. The parents have come from the grandparents, who are a still earlier generation. The grandparents have come from the great-grandparents. The great-grandparents, grandparents, parents (with their brothers and sisters), and children (and their cousins) make four "generations" of a family. The genetic traits of a human family can often be studied for four generations.
Photographs of these people, all taken when each of them was the same age, would show that each family member looked a little different. This is the fact of evolution: A family, like all groups of living things, is changing from generation to generation in small ways, and these changes can add up over many generations and lead to very big differences.
Evolution.
Scientists say that "evolution" has happened when a trait that is caused by genetics becomes more or less common in a group of organisms.
The theory of evolution tries to explain all the patterns found in the entire history of living things. One part of evolution that explains a lot of what we see is due to natural selection. Natural selection says that since children are not exactly like their parents, some of them might have a trait that makes them better able to live where they live. Since they have an advantage, these children are more likely to survive. Children are more like their parents than other unrelated individuals. So the ones with a slight advantage are likely to have children with the same advantage, or might even end up with some children with a bigger advantage. After many generations in the same place, the great-great-great-great-etc. grandchildren are likely to be really good at living where they live.
These changes can happen very fast in the smaller, simpler types of living things. For example, many bacteria (a type of "germ") that cause disease can no longer be killed with some of the antibiotic medicines. But these medicines have only been in use about eighty years, and used to work. The bacteria evolved so that they aren't affected by these types of medicine anymore.
Theory.
There are two main ways that evolution works: natural selection and genetic drift.
Natural selection.
"Natural selection" explains why living organisms change over time to have the physical structure, the functions and behaviour that they have. In other words, Natural selection explains why the bodies of living things look and work the way they do, and why living things act the way they do, when compared with other creatures. It explains why fish are good at swimming and why cheetahs are good at running.
The wings of birds are good examples of evolution that is caused by the creature adapting (changing to fit in) to its environment. Many birds' wings have evolved so that they can fly in different ways, depending on their needs. Forest birds have different needs to desert birds. Vultures live where there is little food. They have to search for it over long distances. Their wings have evolved for soaring so that they do not use much energy when flying for long periods of time.
Penguins spend a lot of time in the ocean. Over time their wings evolved into flippers so that the penguins are excellent at swimming but can no longer fly. Other birds, like ostriches, live on the ground, and do not need their wings to fly. These birds can run fast, and also defend themselves. The wings got smaller. Ostriches' wings are now used only for display. The bird fluffs it wings out to make its body look bigger.
Genetic drift and how species develop.
"Genetic drift" explains how random chance can affect evolution in surprisingly big ways.
Some genetic differences don't seem to make a big difference to the success of the organism. For example, eye colour in humans has no influence on how well the person can see. Blue or brown or green eyes are all equally good. Since eye colour doesn't seem to matter, the colour that gets passed on to offspring is just random chance. It is possible that everyone in a small group could end up with only one of the possibilities (like everyone in a particular town all having blue eyes). This means that all the children of everyone in the group will have just that one possible eye colour. This can work in the same way for other traits.
Sometimes, genetic differences can become important because of changes in an organism's environment. For example, a group of animals might usually eat a particular food. That food is no longer available. The group of animals has to eat a different food. But the "chance differences" that have been caused by genetics may mean that they are not able to eat one possible new food, but are more able to eat another.
Another group of animals might have ended up with the other possible genetic differences, and so they can eat the food that the first group cannot eat. This can cause two groups that began the same to end up very different.
Two groups that start the same can also become very different if they live in different places. Elephants who lived in very cold parts of the world were hairy mammoths. Elephants from warm climates are almost hairless.
The wombats of Australia fall into two main groups, Common wombats and Hairy-nosed wombats. The two types look very similar, apart from the hairiness of their noses. However, they are adapted to different environments. Common wombats live in forested areas and eat mostly green food with lots of moisture. They often feed in the daytime. Hairy-nosed wombats live on hot dry plains where they eat dry grass with very little water or goodness in it. Their metabolic system is slow and they sleep most of the day underground.
When two groups that started the same become different enough, then they become two different species. Part of the theory of Evolution is that all living things started off the same, but then split off into different groups over billions of years.
History.
Charles Darwin wrote a book called "The Origin of Species" in 1859. In this book, Darwin described "natural selection", and put forward evidence to support his ideas. But Darwin did not understand about genetics and how traits were actually passed on. He could not correctly explain what made children look like their parents.
A monk called Gregor Mendel was very interested in breeding plants. He wanted to learn how "traits" were passed on from one generation to the next. He used peas for his experiments because some traits of peas, such as colour and shape, are easy to see. For example, some peas have white flowers and others have red ones. Some peas have green seeds and others have yellow seeds. Mendel used artificial pollination to breed the peas. From 355 artificial pollinations, he got 12.980 plant hybrids, that were not exactly the same as either of their parents. Between 1856 and 1863 he raised about 28.000 pea plants. The results of his research are still used today. His theory (idea) is known as Mendelian inheritance.
But Mendel only told a few people about his ideas, and they didn't believe him, because there was another, older theory about how traits were inherited. Around 1900, Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns, and Erich von Tschermak-Seysenegg came to the same conclusion as Mendel. They explained that things called genes were passed from parent to child. Genes are bits of information that tell how to make some tiny part of the living thing. With mammals and many other living things, a copy of each gene comes from the father and another copy from the mother. Some living organisms, including many plants and some creatures, only have one parent, so get all their genes from them. These genes produce the genetic differences that evolution acts on.
When the theory of evolution was developed, it was not clear that natural selection and genetics worked together. But Ronald Fisher showed that if you have enough genes, you can get enough differences between the living things for natural selection to work. Sewall Wright explained genetic drift in 1931. Meanwhile, J. B. S. Haldane showed that natural selection could work on single genes, and Ernst Mayr used genetic drift to explain speciation.
Scientists continue to explore evolution, and big discoveries are still being made.
Debates about evolution.
The idea that all life evolved has been hotly debated, even before Charles Darwin published "On the Origin of species". Even today, some people still talk about the concept of evolution and what it means to them, to their philosophy and their religion. Sometimes these people also talk about the social implications of evolution. This debate is mostly about the meaning of evolution, and not about how evolution works.
In order to fit in the idea of evolution with their religious views, people have come up with ideas like "guided evolution" or "theistic evolution". They say that evolution is real, but they say, that someone is guiding it in certain ways. There are many different concepts of "theistic evolution". Many creationists believe that the creation myth found in their religion goes against the idea of evolution. As Darwin found out early on, the most controversial part of the evolutionary thought is its implications for human origins.
In some countries, especially in the United States, there is tension between people who accept the idea of evolution and those who reject it. The debate is mostly about if the ideas in evolution should be taught in schools, and in what way.
Other fields, such as cosmology and earth science also conflict with the original writings of many religious texts. Evolutionary biology is opposed much more from religious believers than other groups or organizations.
Abusing evolution.
People have tried to use evolution to support racism. Evolution itself does not support racism, but people wanting to justify racism claimed that black people were inferior, and thus said that because evolution shows that, in nature, "better" animals tend to survive, leading to evolution of improved animals, that since they were clearly "better", they had the right to oppress the "weaker". But they were not actually better, so they were wrong to say this.
One way people claimed evolution could promote discrimination and racism was to say that only the "better" people should have children. The idea to improve the human species in this way is called Eugenics. One of the people who had such ideas was Francis Galton. Galton was a very bright scientist, and meant to do good.He said that the human gene pool should be improved by selective breeding policies. This would mean that those who were considered "good stock" would receive a reward if they reproduced. However, other people added to this, and said those considered "bad stock" would need to undergo compulsory sterilization, prenatal testing and birth control; and they might even have to be killed. Galton's idea got used in very bad ways. His idea was also wrong, because there's so many different skills people could have, so you couldn't tell who was "good stock" and who was "bad stock" anyway.
Another example of using wrong ideas about evolution to support bad things is "Social Darwinism". Social Darwinism is a term given to the 19th century Whig Malthusian theory started by Herbert Spencer. Spencer had ideas about "survival of the fittest", which he tried to apply to commerce and human societies as a whole. Other people used these ideas to claim that social differences, racism, and imperialism were justified. Today, most scientists and philosophers say that the theory of evolution should not be used to support such ideas. They also say that it is difficult to find data that can support them.
Controversy.
Certain people oppose the idea of evolution. They disagree with it for a number of reasons. Most often these reasons are influenced by their religious beliefs. Their beliefs are usually called creationism or intelligent design.
Despite this, evolution is one of the most successful theories in science. People have found it to be useful for different kinds of research. None of the other proposals explain things, such as fossil records, as well. So, for almost all scientists, evolution is not in doubt.
What evolution is used for today.
A big field where evolution is used is called artificial selection. This is when certain traits are picked in a population of animals. Humans have used this for thousands of years to domesticate plants and animals. More recently, such selection has become a very important part of genetic engineering. Selectable markers such as antibiotic resistance genes are used to manipulate DNA in molecular biology.
Evolution can produce highly optimized processes and networks. This has many applications in computer science. In Computer Science, evolution is only simulated with evolutionary algorithms and artificial life. The work of Nils Aall Barricelli in these fields started in the 1960s. Alex Fraser continued to work on these ideas. He published a series of papers on the simulation of artificial selection. Artificial evolution became a widely recognized optimization method as a result of the work of Ingo Rechenberg in the 1960s and early 1970s. Reichenberg used evolution strategies to solve complex engineering problems. Genetic algorithms in particular became popular through the writing of John Holland. As academic interest grew, dramatic increases in the power of computers allowed practical applications, including the automatic evolution of computer programs. Evolutionary algorithms are now used to solve multi-dimensional problems better than software produced by human designers. It can also optimize the design of systems.
