A civil war is a war where the two sides involved in the fighting are both from the same country or kingdom. In the period of the English Civil War, the King ruled England, Scotland, Wales and the whole of Ireland, but the fighting that took place in each of these countries broke out at different times and for several different reasons.
After a few years of quarrelling, the members of Parliament raised an army to fight against the King. The King moved out of London and took the royal court to Oxford, where he had more loyal followers than in London. The first war was fought between King Charles's army and the army of Parliament. King Charles's army were sometimes called "Cavaliers", and the army of Parliament were sometimes called "Roundheads". Parliament won the first war, and King Charles was put in prison, but he escaped and a second war broke out. Parliament won the second war also, and they put King Charles on trial because they did not want any more fighting. He was found guilty of treason and was executed by having his head chopped off, but this did not stop the fighting.
During the war, a new leader had been found by Parliament, a man called Oliver Cromwell, who was very good at leading an army and also had ideas about how to rule the country. Not everyone liked him, but he was the strongest leader and in time he became the ruler of the whole country. Cromwell took the title of "Lord Protector" rather than King, because he did not think the country needed another king. In the meantime, King Charles I's eldest son, the Prince of Wales, had left Britain and set up his own royal court in Holland, calling himself King Charles II of England. He came back to fight another battle against the army of Parliament. A lot of his support came from Scottish people, because King Charles I had been born in Scotland and there were still many Scots who were loyal to the royal family. The Third Civil War (1649 - 1651) was fought between supporters of King Charles II and supporters of the Rump Parliament. The Civil War ended when Parliament won the Battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651. Charles II had to disguise himself in order to escape the country.
Oliver Cromwell ruled the country until he died in 1658. After that, there was no leader strong enough to take over from him, and the people asked Charles II to return from Holland and be King of Britain again.
