"Everything That Happens Will Happen Today" is the second album made by David Byrne and Brian Eno, released on August 18, 2008. They also made an album in 1981 called "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts" and Eno helped make songs with Byrne and Talking Heads. Byrne and Eno made this music in 2007 and early 2008. Byrne will tour for this album and play these songs and other music these two have written.
History.
In December 2007, David Byrne announced on the BBC Radio music show, "The Weekender", that he was working with musician/producer and former collaborator Brian Eno on a brand new album of "proper songs", describing it as a "completely different thing" from "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts", which was mostly experimental. While discussing the 2006 remix of that album at a dinner party, Eno suggested finishing some songs that he had written and intended to finish but that did not have lyrics, some of which were eight years old. Byrne visited Eno's studio to listen to the rough mixes of the demos and the two decided to collaborate to finish writing the songs, leaving Eno and Peter Chilvers to convert a variety of digital music formats into Musical Instrument Digital Interface to strip out information and make them suitable for Byrne to embellish. (Chilvers would be thanked in the liner notes as "Digitial Archeologist.") The two continued to write for several months - although Byrne confessed that he was initially "terrified" at writing lyrics for the demos - and agreed that if the project wasn't fun for both of them, they would abandon it.
Composition.
He elaborated, "In a nutshell, Brian wrote most of the music, and I composed most of the vocal melodies and lyrics, and then sang them." If Byrne's vocal harmonies were radical enough, Eno would revise the instrumentation to accompany it. Using a style similar to the Talking Heads album "Speaking in Tongues", Byrne scatted and murmured some lyrics before they were completed and Eno also contributed some vocal harmonization he credits as "inhuman piano."
Both musicians continued to work on their own projects during the composition of "Everything That Happens Will Happen Today" - including Byrne conducting the second season of "Big Love" and composing and recording "Here Lies Love" with Fatboy Slim, Eno producing Coldplay's "Viva la Vida". Chris Martin of Coldplay even wrote a song to the instrumental track for "One Fine Day", but acquiesced when he heard Byrne's song saying that he "couldn't do better than that." Once that song was finished, the two began in earnest writing the rest of the music. As the project progressed, Byrne got to working several hours a day on the project.
The two were inspired by Gospel music while making the album; both have described it as "electronic Gospel", in particular the track "Life Is Long." In addition to subtle Biblical themes in the lyrics, Eno was inspired by Gospel music, which he initially discovered through Talking Heads while working on "More Songs About Buildings and Food" by listening to "Surrender to His Will" by Reverend Maceo Woods and the Christian Tabernacle Choir. While Byrne considers the music "[un]like any contemporary gospel record that you would hear out there," it is "informed by that feeling and those kind of lyrics, which allude to hope in the face of despair." Eno also considers the album "[S]omething that combines something very human and fallible and personal, with something very electronic and mathematical sometimes." The two tried to "make that picture of the human still trying to survive in an increasingly complicated digital world... It's quite easy to make just digital music and it's quite easy to make just human music, but to try and make a combination is sort of, exciting, I think."
Eno's demos were primarily written in major chords, which Byrne considered slightly "ominous." In spite of this, Byrne's lyrics ended up being hopeful and spiritual, with themes of redemption. Byrne has speculated that the hopeful lyrics might be an antidote to being "completely pessimistic and cynical about politics and the state of the world." As he explained, "I was surprised that's what came out... The tracks are very different from what I would have done myself. I lean toward things that are more complicated." Eno also thinks the album is "[m]uch better than the songs [he] imagined."
Eno has also said the album is about "paint[ing] a picture of the human trying to survive in an increasingly digital world." Themes of humanity struggling with technology are apparent on several tracks. The lyrical content includes "a sinister inflection" but "many songs feel fairly uplifting and the overall tone is hopeful." Byrne attempted to write "simple but not corny, basic but heartfelt;" one of his inspirations in writing lyrics was the story of Valentino Achak Deng in Dave Eggers' ' and the two are thanked in the liner notes.
Production.
By March 2008, the duo had recruited multi-instrumentalist and previous Eno collaborator Leo Abrahams to play guitar, percussion instruments, and piano and Seb Rochford to play drums with Byrne in New York City. Abrahams continued to perform in his home studio and only played guitar with Byrne on one occasion. They would continue working on the tracks in Abrahams' studio through May, with all collaborations being carried on via e-mail. In April 2008, speaking at an event in New York, Byrne confirmed the release of a new album, calling it a "record of sung songs" in contrast to the experimental music from "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts" and later told the "New York Daily News" that "Brian had written a lot of music, but needed some words, which I know how to do. What's it sound like? Electronic Gospel. That's all I'm saying." Eno also explained the differences between this album and their previous one saying, "[T]his is quite different from "My Life" in that the intention of that album was to not use our voices at all, but instead to find voices and stick them on to the music. This new one is different – these are songs written and sung by David. They cover quite a range. They go from electronic folk Gospel to quite indefinable areas of music."
Throughout the spring and summer, Abrahams recorded drums at his home studio and Cherif Hashizume recorded more Cafe Music Studios, while Robert Harder at Harder Sound recorded the drums on "My Big Nurse", "Never Thought", "The Painting", and "Life Is Long". Mixing continued through June 2008 in New York by Patrick Dillett at Kampo Studios, who recorded brass and percussion and sent the audio to Greg Calbi at Sterling Sound for mastering. On July 28, 2008, details of the album became of public knowledge when Byrne posted on his blog that he and Eno had finished the new album, titled "Everything That Happens Will Happen Today", and that it would be released on August 18, 2008. The album website was launched on the same day, with an introduction and a promotional video of Byrne announcing the new album.
Release.
The album was self-released on August 18, 2008, only through the official album's website. It is available there free for streaming and for purchase as a download of DRM-free MP3s; they plan to release the album from other online digital music services in September 2008. No record label is involved on the release, and independent distributors will handle the physical product, which will be released in October 2008 as an enhanced CD and a deluxe-packaged CD with graphics and packaging done by Stefan Sagmeister, who received a Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package Grammy Award in 2005 for art direction on the Talking Heads' "Once in a Lifetime" box set and designed the cover to Byrne's "Feelings". This design of a domestic scene has been compared to "The Sims".
The next day, Byrne's soundtrack to the television series "Big Love" - ' - was released as a Compact Disc.
Versions.
In addition, customers are entitled to lossless FLAC versions of the album at no extra cost for all versions of the album.
Singles.
The first single off the album, "Strange Overtones", was released on August 4, 2008 as a free digital download only through the album's website. The track has been described as "a song about writing a song." It was downloaded over 40,000 times within the first three days it was available.
Critical reception.
Album reviews have been mostly positive; for instance, with eight reviews, the album has received a 77% on Metacritic. Positive reviews have labeled it "exceedingly pleasant," "maddeningly infectious," and "vibrant."
Promotion.
While Byrne and Eno have done a few interviews for the album, the two are attempting to market it via word-of-mouth and Internet hype rather than a traditional marketing scheme. Eno was convinced in part because of his own preferences for digital music from the iTunes Music Store rather than CDs as well as the success of Radiohead's "In Rainbows" from 2007. Byrne was also impressed by the band's release strategy as a means of valuing music. The duo have carefully avoided Internet leaks by not giving out promotional copies of the album to journalists, but Byrne did preview the song "One Fine Day" prior to the release by performing it with a choir of senior citizens.
Byrne has outlined the relative merits of different distribution models with this one reflecting his "self-distribution model" in which "the artist stands to receive the largest percentage of income from sales per unit — sales of anything. A larger percentage of fewer sales, most likely, but not always. Artists doing it for themselves can actually make more money than the massive pop star, even though the sales numbers may seem minuscule by comparison."
The duo enlisted a music marketing startup company - Topspin Media - to design their site, delivery options for the digital music, and promotional web widgets. The company used viral marketing techniques to collect potential customers' e-mail addresses and encourage them to post the album streaming on their blogs. The approach has been lauded as a way of undermining copyright infringement. Topspin have also created a Flickr pool encouraging users to upload screenshots of the widget posted to web sites.
Songs of David Byrne and Brian Eno Tour.
Byrne has assembled a band to tour for the album, performing music from this collaboration as well as the duo's previous "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts" and songs from the three Eno-produced Talking Heads albums - "More Songs About Buildings and Food", "Fear of Music", and "Remain in Light". (The two also collaborated for several tracks on Byrne's "The Catherine Wheel".) By performing music from all of their collaborations, Byrne hopes to "draw a line linking this new material with what we did 30 years ago, a little bit anyway." Although early reports indicated that Eno would be participating, he will not.
In planning the set lists for the tour, Byrne has assembled songs "from this new record, as well from collaborations Brian and I have done in the past which includes one song from "Bush of Ghosts" [and] three songs from the three Talking Heads records we did together."
