Esperanto is a special language that was made to be very easy to learn. It was made in the end of the nineteenth century by Ludovic Lazarus Zamenhof, a Polish eye doctor. Zamenhof made Esperanto because he wanted there to be an easy language that everyone could learn, so that people from different parts of the world could easily talk together.
The name "Esperanto" comes from the name that Zamenhof used for himself when he wrote the first book about the new language, "Lingvo internacia. Antaŭparolo kaj plena lernolibro" ("An International Language - Introduction and Complete Textbook"). The book appeared in 1887. The name he used when writing this book was "Doktoro Esperanto", which means "Doctor Hopeful."
The original official name of the language was La Internacia Lingvo (The International Language), but speakers of the language soon started using the shorter name "Esperanto".
Esperanto culture.
People who speak Esperanto are often called Esperantists. No one knows exactly how many people now speak Esperanto. The most common guesses are between several hundred thousand and 2 million speakers around the world. It is estimated that 1000 people know Esperanto from birth (because they learned it from their parents, in addition to learning a national language, such as English or Polish.) There are many couples from 2 different countries who speak different languages, but have Esperanto as their common language.
Many people use Esperanto to communicate by mail or email or blogs with Esperantists in other countries. Some people travel and meet other Esperantists in person.
There are many annual meetings. The largest is the "Universala Kongreso de Esperanto" (Universal Congress of Esperanto), held in a different country each year. In recent years it has had around 2000 people from 60 or more countries.
There are books and magazines written in Esperanto, and much literature translated into Esperanto from other languages. This includes famous works, such as the Bible and plays by Shakespeare, as well as less famous works which do not have English translations.
There are bands who sing in Esperanto, perform live concerts and sell recordings of their music.
Goals of the Esperanto movement.
Zamenhof wanted to make an easy language to increase international understanding. The goal was, giving an international communication language, that is, as a universal"(world)" second language, not to replace national languages. This goal was widely shared with Esperanto speakers in the early years of the Esperanto movement. After that, Esperanto speakers began to see the language and the culture that was shared is owned by themselves, even if Esperanto is never chosen by the United Nations or other international organizations.
Those Esperanto speakers who want the Esperanto to be chosen by organizations or used worldwide are commonly called "finvenkistoj", from "fina venko", meaning "final victory", or "pracelistoj", from "pracelo", meaning "original goal". by Mark Feeney. "The Boston Globe", 12 May 1999 Those who focus on the basic value of the language are commonly called "raŭmistoj", from Rauma, Finland, where a statement on the near-term"(not far from today)" not believing in the "fina venko" and the value of Esperanto culture was made at the International Youth Congress(meeting) in 1980., by Giorgio Silfer. These groups are, however, not from both sides exclusive.
The Prague Manifesto (1996) presents the ideas of the ordinary people of the Esperanto movement and of its main organization, the World Esperanto Association (UEA). (English version). Universala Esperanto-Asocio, updated 2003-03-26.
The language.
Esperanto uses words from some other languages, such as Latin, Russian, and German.
a b c ĉ d e f g ĝ h ĥ i j ĵ k l m n o p r s ŝ t u ŭ v z
A in Esperanto is like a in father, b is like b in English, c is like ts is lets, ĉ is like ch in chocolate, d is like d in English, e is like e in met, f is like f in flower, g is like g in go, ĝ is like j, dg in judge, h is like h in honey, ĥ makes a sound that vibrates the throat (the sound does not exist in English; it is often written in English as kh or ch in foreign names and words, in Arabic, Hebrew, Russian, Greek... "ח خ x χ"), i is like ee in speed, j is like y in you, ĵ is like s in pleasure, k is like the English k, l is like l in English, m is like English m, n is like English n, o is like o in note, p is like the English p, r is a rolled r (trilled, as in Spanish, Italian, Arabic, Russian), s is like the English s in simple, ŝ is like the sh in short, t is just like the English t, u is like oo in boot, ŭ is similar to w, v is like v in English, and z is like z in zipper.
There is no Q, W, X, or Y in the Esperanto language.
Grammar.
The rules for using the language (grammar) are very simple. Rules in the Esperanto language never change and can always be used in the same way.
The basic words are: "mi" - I, "vi" - you, "li" - he, "ŝi" - she, "ĝi" - it, "la" - the, "jes" - yes, "ne" - no.
Nouns end in "-o". For example, "patro" means "father". To make a noun plural add -j. For example: "patroj" means "fathers".
Adjectives end in "-a", adverbs end in "-e", for example "rapide" means "fast", "granda" means "big", "bona" means "good", "bone" means "well".
Many words can be made opposite by adding "mal" at the beginning.
These words combined can make a very long word, such as "malmultekosta" (cheap), "vendredviandmanĝmalpermeso" (that meat cannot be eaten on Friday).
Technical Problems.
cx gx hx jx sx ux.
Normal sample: "Ĉiuj" homoj estas denaske liberaj kaj egalaj "laŭ" digno kaj rajtoj. Ili posedas racion kaj konsciencon, kaj devus konduti unu la alian en spirito de frateco.
Simple version: "Cxiuj" homoj estas denaske liberaj kaj egalaj "laux" digno kaj rajtoj. Ili posedas racion kaj konsciencon, kaj devus konduti unu la alian en spirito de frateco.
Translation: All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
