Ebola, pronounced E- Bo-la, is a "hemorrhagic fever" virus. (Hemorrhagic means causes very heavy bleeding.) It is a very deadly disease. 50-90% of people who get Ebola die. People who get infected with Ebola virus get the disease "Ebola hemorrhagic fever".
How people get Ebola.
In people, "transmission" (giving the virus to someone) happens because of touching fluids with the virus. People with Ebola hemorrhagic (bleeding) fever bleed very much. They have blood in diarrhea and vomit. They bleed from their noses, mouths, and genitals. These liquids are very infectious (they can make other people get the virus.)
Symptoms of Ebola.
When people get Ebola the first symptoms look like some other diseases. People get fever, feel very tired, have headache (pain in the head), pain in the stomach, pain in joints, and pain in the throat. Sometimes people think they have other diseases like malaria or typhoid fever.
Later, people get much more sick. They have very bad bleeding. They get shock: low blood pressure, fast pulse (heart rate), and low blood circulation to the body. This causes organs to get very sick. The organs stop working. This is called "organ failure". Then, even if they make it to a hospital, "most" die.
Ebola cannot be caught through the air.
Treatment of Ebola.
There is no special treatment for Ebola hemorrhagic fever. But if people get care from doctors and nurses more live. This is called supportive care. Supportive care can be fluids and blood given in people's veins. It can be medicines to make their blood pressure and blood circulation better.
When people in a place get Ebola, it is called an "outbreak". If doctors see an outbreak is happening, they try to stop it. They stop it by isolating people with infection. This means keeping the blood and fluids from people with Ebola from touching other people. Then other people do not get the virus.
When an outbreak happens, many people come to try and help stop it. The World Health Organization is the most important group that tries to stop Ebola outbreaks.
Scientists are trying to find a vaccine for Ebola.
