Economics is the study of how people make choices to satisfy their wants.
There are three main ideas that are useful for understanding economics.
Three ideas.
Economics is a science that studies how people try to make use of the limited resources in the world to satisfy their wants. People's resources include their money, their free time, and their ability to work and make money. People have many wants for goods, such as the want for food, for houses to live in, and a new car to drive. However, there is only a limited amount of resources and goods available, which is called scarcity. For example, a person only has a limited amount of money and a limited amount of free time. This means that they have to make choices about how to spend these scarce resources on the different goods that they want.
The advantage, when people work together.
When people work together, there is an advantage for everybody. People concentrate on things they have very good skills off and produce especially theese goods (services). This principle can be used by countries and is an important argument for the free trade between economics.
The subjects and objects in economics.
The subjects of economic are households, business companies, the state and foreign countries. Households offer their production factors to the companies. This includes work, ground, capital (machines, buildings) and information. They get income whereof they buy and consume goods. Business companies produce and sell goods and buy production factors from the households and other companies. The state is divided in institutions and organisations. For example the United States of America consists of 50 states, where every state has his own area of responsibility. The state distributes the earnings from the business companies and households. These payments are called transfer payments. Public goods like streets or university education should be available for everyone. The last subject are foreign countries this includes all households, business companies und state institutions, which aren´t based in the mother land. They demand and supply goods from abroad.
The objects in the economic are consumer goods, capital goods and factors of production. Consumer goods are classified in usage goods for example toilet paper, in purpose goods for example a car and in services for example a cleaning lady. Capital goods are goods, which are necessary for producing other goods. Examples for these are buildings, equipment and machines. Factors of production are work, ground, capital, information and environment.
History.
Economists are strongly influenced by their times, for example, Karl Marx lived in a time where workers' conditions were very poor. John Maynard Keynes lived through the Great Depression of the 1930s. Today's economists can look back and understand why they made their judgements, and try to make better ones.
Branches of economics.
The two main branches of economics are microeconomics and macroeconomics. Microeconomics looks at the behavior of individuals, homes, businesses or even groups of these. Microeconomics looks at prices of things and of services. It wants to help people decide how to divide society's resources. To do this, microeconomics wants to understand how decisions are made and how these small decisions affect bigger things.
Macroeconomics looks at all the economy. It tries to explain the causes of numbers like national income, employment rates, and inflation. Connecting the two branches has been important and the general idea since the early 1980s. A good macroeconomic theory is based on microeconomics, meaning one can explain macroeconomic events using microeconomics for individuals.
