Electricity is a type of Energy that can flow through wires. Flow of this energy is caused by movement of electric charge. However, this word is also used to refer a number of other effects also. For example, lightning, Static Electricity etc, are sometimes referred as Electricity.
Electricity arrives at our homes through wires. It is used by Electric Lamps for producing light, Electric Heaters to produce heat etc. It is also used by many devices like washing machine, Electric Cooker, etc for doing their work.
In factories, electricity is used for running machines. These machine produce goods useful for us.
The people who deals with electricity and electrical devices in our homes and factories are called "Electricians".
Electricity in physics.
In physics, "gravity pulls things from a place that is higher to a place that is lower". Water always flows from a higher place to a lower place. This can be said even more simply as: "Energy moves from somewhere high to somewhere low."
Electric charge is another form of attraction like gravity. Unlike gravity it only pulls on things that have an electric charge. If something has a charge it will move towards something else that has an opposite charge or away from some thing with the same charge. Some charges are called positive (+) and others are called negative (-). So 2 things with a + charge will move apart and so will two things with a - charge. If two things have different charges + and - or - and + they will be pulled together.
The tiniest things with a charge are called particles. Generally protons are the tiniest things with a + charge and electrons are the tiniest things with a - charge. Since electrons are the smallest and lighter of these two kinds of particle they move when they feel an electric attractions and the protons stay where they are.
It can be said that "Electricity goes from the place where there are more electrons (-) than protons (+) to the place where there are more protons (+) than electrons (-))." Electricity was discovered before anyone could detect electrons or protons an electricians have always shown it as flowing the other way from too much + charge to the - charge. We now know the actual flow of electrons is the other way.
In many ways the flow of electrons is like the flow of water down a hill.
Protons and neutrons.
Electric charge has to do with electrons and protons. Electrons are negatively charged while protons are positively charged. Electric charge is a "conserved" property, which means that it acts like an object and can be moved from place to place. It also means that energy can not be made or destroyed, it can only be changed from electrical energy (one form) to any other kind of energy (like heat, kinetic energy, mechanical energy, etc.)
Methods of generating.
Electricity is generated in places called power stations. There are many ways of generating electricity, and they can be classified into two parts: renewable energy resources and non-renewable energy resources.
Geothermal power stations.
Geothermal power stations drill deep into the earth's crust accessing heat to generate electricity (thus comes "thermal" meaning heat). The heat is used to turn water into steam. The force of the steam turns giant fan-like structures called turbines, which in turn cause 'generators' to generate electricity. The heat may be generated by burning fossil fuels (sources of non-reusable energy dug from the earth that were formed over millions of years due to high pressure and temperature on dead plants and animals buried deep inside the earth) Examples are oil, coal, natural gas. Geothermal power stations use the heat from rocks deep inside the earth to heat water in pipes in order to turn it into steam. This is done in New Zealand, Iceland, and many other places with volcanic hot spots.
Renewable sources of electricity.
There are many other renewable sources of energy. Hydro-electric power (HEP) uses the force of water in rivers to turn turbines, which turn generators. HEP schemes are found across the Amazon River in Brazil.
Wave energy is another option where the force of sea waves is used to turn turbines. Wind energy is another where the force of the wind is used to turn giant, noisy and some might say ugly 'wind turbines'. However, some also enjoy the tranquil like motion of the huge blades. Solar power is another renewable energy resource where the sun's energy is converted to electric energy by solar cells.
