Elizabeth I of England (September 7, 1533 - March 24, 1603) was the Queen of England from November 17, 1558 until she died in 1603. She has also been called "The Virgin Queen" or "Good Queen Bess". Many people think that she was the greatest monarch ever to rule England.
Early life.
Elizabeth was born in the Palace of Placentia in Greenwich, England. She was the daughter of King Henry VIII of England and his second wife, Anne Boleyn. When she was very young, she lost her right to be called a princess, because her mother was found guilty of having lovers and was executed. After Anne's death, the king said she should no longer be treated as his daughter. Her half-sister Mary was in the same position. Mary was much older than Elizabeth, but her mother had been divorced by King Henry and she was also being treated as if she was not the King's daughter.
After Anne Boleyn died, King Henry married Jane Seymour, who became queen. Jane had a baby son, who was named Edward. Men were thought to make better rulers than women, so Edward became heir to the throne as soon as he was born.
Elizabeth was taken away from the royal court and was looked after by other people. She was given a good education. Elizabeth could speak and read six languages: her native English, as well as French, Italian, Spanish, Greek, and Latin.
When she was thirteen, King Henry died. Elizabeth's younger half-brother, Edward, became King even though he was only a child. He was called King Edward VI of England. Because King Henry had no other children, he left a will saying that, if Edward had no children of his own, Mary would be queen after him, and Elizabeth would be queen after Mary. At the time no one thought this would ever happen, but Edward died when he was only fifteen. Mary then became queen, and was called Queen Mary I of England.
During Mary's reign, life became difficult for Elizabeth. When King Henry VIII divorced Mary's mother, he had quarrelled with the Pope and most people in England had turned away from the Roman Catholic religion. Mary had been loyal to the old religion, and, as soon as she became queen, she married King Philip II of Spain, who was a Roman Catholic. This marriage made her unpopular because Spain and England were old enemies. Mary wanted everyone else in England to be Roman Catholic again, so she tried to make Elizabeth attend Roman Catholic services. Elizabeth pretended to believe the same as Mary, but she was not really a Catholic. Because of the argument over religion, many people in the country preferred Elizabeth to Mary and wanted to make her queen. She was accused of trying to take Mary's throne, and was even put into the Tower of London for a while.
Elizabeth became the Queen of England in 1558 after her half-sister, Queen Mary, died. She was crowned on January 15, 1559 at Westminster Abbey. She was crowned by Owen Oglethorpe, Bishop of Carlisle. Her father Henry VIII made a new law, the Act of Supremacy, in 1534. Supremacy means top and power. This law decided that the king was the head of the church in England. Elizabeth tried to bring Catholics and Protestants together. She did not believe that people should be punished for what they believed in, but she was strict about people keeping to the rules of the church.
Elizabeth has been called the "Virgin Queen", because she never married. It is not clear why Elizabeth never married. Because Elizabeth was a woman, many people believed that she would do whatever her husband told her. Mary's marriage to Philip of Spain had caused a lot of problems, and Elizabeth did not want to make the same mistake in marrying a foreign ruler. If she married one person, she would form an alliance with one country, but could make many enemies. Politics would become uneasy and England would be opposed by other countries. This was probably one of the reasons that she refused all of the marriages proposed to her.
If Elizabeth had married a man who was not a prince or king, that might also have caused problems because other people would have been jealous of her husband. Most people believe that she was in love with Robert Dudley, the 1st Earl of Leicester. She had first met Robert Dudley when they were both prisoners in the Tower of London during Queen Mary's reign. However, Robert Dudley was already married to a woman called Amy Robsart. After Elizabeth became queen, there was gossip about her friendship with Robert Dudley. Not long afterwards, Amy died in an accident. It seems that she fell down stairs, but her body was not found until later. Some people said that her husband had arranged for her to be killed, so that he would be free to marry Queen Elizabeth. All this gossip made it impossible for Elizabeth to marry him. When Elizabeth found she could not marry the man she loved, she may have decided that she would not marry at all.
Elizabeth I caught smallpox in 1562. This scared Parliament, because they did not know who would be the King or Queen after her. They asked Elizabeth I to name an heir, but she did not.
The most likely person to follow Elizabeth to the throne of England was her cousin, Mary Stuart, who was already Queen of Scotland. Mary Stuart and Elizabeth were rivals, but Mary was a Catholic and Elizabeth was a Protestant. Mary married a French prince and became the French queen was well as the Queen of Scots. Some people wanted to force Elizabeth off the throne and replace her with Mary. This made Mary a danger to Elizabeth.
Because many Scottish people were Protestants, they did not like Mary and wanted to get rid of her. She was put in prison, but in 1568, she escaped and ran away to England, to ask for help from Elizabeth. Elizabeth kept her as a prisoner for many years. In 1578, Elizabeth was told that Mary had been plotting to kill her and become queen in her place. Mary was put on trial and found guilty, and Elizabeth agreed to put Mary to death. This action was popular with Elizabeth's court, but it made her enemies in the Catholic countries of Europe, such as France and Spain.
Foreign wars.
In 1572 Elizabeth I made an alliance with France. She even agreed to marry one of their princes, but later changed her mind. In 1580, Pope Gregory XIII sent an army into Ireland to help with a rebellion against Elizabeth, but this failed.
After the death of Mary Stuart, the trouble with Spain became serious. Elizabeth did not like King Philip of Spain, who had been married to her elder sister, and she had helped the Netherlands fight against Spain for their independence. An attempted Spanish invasion in 1588 (see Spanish Armada) failed, and this made Queen Elizabeth I very popular.
End of Elizabeth's reign.
After the death of her friend Robert Dudley, Elizabeth was very upset and turned to Dudley's stepson, the Earl of Essex, who was a young man and not always very sensible. He let Elizabeth down several times. In the end, she sent him away from the royal court. Essex behaved very stupidly by getting a gang of his friends together and trying to take over the country. Not many people supported them, and they were all executed. Elizabeth was very hurt by the way he had behaved, and she was even more upset at having to agree to his execution.
Elizabeth I fell ill in February 1603, suffering from physical weakness and insomnia. She had no children, so she decide that James VI to be the next king of England. James VI was the son of Mary Stuart, but he was a Protestant.
Elizabeth I died at the age of 69, on March 24, 1603. She had managed to keep peace in the country and to keep the independence of England. These were thought to be great achievements.
Legacy.
There have been many films about Elizabeth I.
