Frieza (フリーザ, "Furīza") is a fictional character in "Dragon Ball Z".
Frieza is one of the strongest aliens in "Dragon Ball Z". He is very good at invading other planets. Frieza is very mean person who thinks he is very strong. He can kill everyone on a planet, and will not care. He will even kill his own servants. Frieza is always trying to get more power. Because of this, he ends up fighting the heroes of "Dragon Ball Z" so he can get the Dragon Balls. The Dragon Balls are very special balls that can grant wishes.
Frieza is what the creator, Akira Toriyama, thought monsters looked like in his childhood.
Name pun and debate.
Frieza's name is a pun on all things relating to the cold, with family members introduced later following his example. As his name ends in a short "a" vowel (rather than the long "ā" which usually signifies "er" in kana spellings on English words), the character's name is typically spelled with an "a" at the end (as opposed to "Freezer"). However, during FUNimation's dubbing of "Dragon Ball Z", the English writers went with the spelling of "Frieza". This has led to some conjecture over the "true" spelling of his name: U.S. released video games and the English dub use "Frieza", while the Japanese language subtitles on FUNimation's DVDs and the Viz translation of the manga redundantly uses "Freeza."
Goku: Cell is still alive? What do you mean Kaio-sama! He blew himself up. You saw that.
Kaio Sama: I don't know how it happened but I'm quite sure he's still alive.
Goku: This cant be. You mean I did all of this for nothing.
Kaio Sama: That's right. Including getting me blown up also.
Mr. Popo: God what's the matter.
Dende: I don't know if Gohan-san can beat him this time.
Cell: Surprised? Well I'll tell you what happened. This was quite unexpected and a lucky turn of events. Inside my brain, there is a small lump of nerve. It is my nucleus, so to speak. As long as the nucleus is undamaged I can keep regenerating my cells and recreate my whole body!
Goku: Sorry Kaio Sama. But I didn't have any choice.
Kaio Sama: But to bring him here? (Cell explodes as do Goku, Kaio Sama, Bubbles, Gregory and Kaio's planet)
Cell: (Cell forming back to his perfect form) My nucleus survived the explosion. I didn't even know such a thing could happen. It was totally unexpected. And that's not all. I have the perfect body again even without the androids in my system. This is not just the "Perfect body" I used to have. It is a far more powerful one as powerful as Son Gohan. It's probably due to the Saiyajin cells that I have in my system. The Saiyajin cell is said to increase its strength when it faces death. Furthermore I had a chance to absorb Son Goku's instantaneous movement skill (Teleports back to Earth)
(End flashback sequence) In other words I have obtained everything I'd wanted because of the explosion. I should thank Son Goku. He gave me a wonderful farewell present.
Cell: (Gohan smirks) What's so funny?
Gohan: Yeah. I'm happy because you're back so that I can take my revenge on you for my father! I wanted to kill you myself. For my father.
Cell: I don't know about that. I don't think you can beat me like you did before.
Yamucha: Trunks. (Yamucha runs over to him and kneels over the fallen warrior)
Goku: Bye Bye everyone (Goku disappears)
Vegeta: (says aloud) Kakarotto (Trunks gets blasted through the chest)
Cell: I should thank Son Goku he gave me a wonderful farewell present. Happy?
Gohan: I can take revenge on you for my father.
Vegeta: Gohan (Trunks coughing up blood)
Gohan: I wanted to kill you myself.
Vegeta: Damn! What was I doing? I should have been the one to kill Cell! Not that, that low-class fighter or his son! (Ends thinking) Ahhhhhhhhhhh!!! (blasts off towards Cell and turns Super Saiyajin and shoots a ki blast)
TV Reporter: A fierce new battle is raging ladies and gentlemen. (The reporter gets frustrated and throws down the mike. Vegeta fires multiply ki blasts)
Vegeta: Cell! I the Prince of Planet Vegeta! I will be the one who will destroy you! (continue firing multiply ki bolts and stops)
Cell: (He jumps out of the smoke at a stunned Vegeta) What was the Prince of Planet Vegeta going to do? (Backhands him hard to the ground)
TV Reporter: Cell has beaten another one!
Mr. Satan: What the hell is happening.
Cell: Go to hell, Vegeta! (Cell shoots a blast, and Gohan darts to protect Vegeta, moments later Gohan gets up and blood trickles down his arm toward the ground)
Kuririn: Vegeta you idiot! We could have revived Trunks with the Dragon Balls!
Cell: Well you look like you still have some fight left in you. But I won't play around with you anymore. I've had enough of this.
Gohan: (Thinking) Cell's power has increase tremendously.
Piccolo: The Senzu. Where is the Senzu?
Planet Namek takeover.
Twenty-four years later, Frieza spies on Vegeta's scouter during his mission on Earth and in doing so learns of the existence of the Dragon Balls on Planet Namek. Planning to obtain them and make a wish for immortality, Frieza uses his mercenary forces to try and extort the Dragon Balls from the Nameks. After Cui, Dodoria and Zarbon fall to Vegeta's wrath, the Ginyu Force is summoned by Frieza to retrieve the Dragon Balls and neutralize the Saiyan mercenary, but fail to do so when Goku arrives at Planet Namek to kick some but.
While searching for the remaining Dragon Balls, Frieza is confronted by Nail, the strongest of the Namek warriors. Frieza defeats Nail effortlessly, leaving him to die after discovering the remaining Dragon Ball has already been taken by Krillin and Gohan. Enraged, the great tyrant follows in pursuit of the heroes only to be faced with a much more powerful Vegeta who is now capable of matching Frieza's current strength.
Spurred on by Vegeta, Frieza unveils his second form, allowing him to defeat Vegeta and critically injure Krillin, taunting Gohan with his friend's limp body. Before he can finish them off, Piccolo joins the battle - roughly even in abilities to Frieza, thanks to a splendid fusion with the dying Nail. The heroes are able to regroup, Dende healing them one after another. Frieza himself is seriously wounded for the first time: Krillin is able to chop off a portion of his tail using a Destructo Disk.
Having difficulty contending with Piccolo, Frieza again transformed, unlocking more of his power and enabling him to lay waste to his opponent. Finally he unveiled his true form, stressing that he intended to give his foes the pleasure of observing it before they died. As his first act, Frieza murders Dende, who had been healing the heroes, before brutally beating Vegeta. Just as Frieza was about to slay Vegeta, the healed Goku arrives on the battlefield, ready to fight Frieza. Vegeta, believing (incorrectly) that Goku had finally become a full-fledge Super Saiyan, taunts Frieza, even though, he, Vegeta, is too badly beaten to even stand. Frieza, proud of his past accomplishments, smirks before sending a Death Beam through the Saiyan Prince's heart. Teetering on the brink of death, Vegeta is able to tell the newly-healed Goku of Frieza's genocide of the Saiyan race, imploring him to take revenge on behalf for all Saiyans. As Vegeta finishes his plea to Goku, he dies. Goku, saddened by Vegeta's death, buries him and vows to finish Frieza. Goku and Frieza then spar, with Frieza realizing that his opponent is the son of the Saiyan that gave him such trouble years before. Goku and Frieza are an even match for awhile, until Frieza reveals that he had only been fighting at a mere fraction of his full power. Frieza then increases to 50%, and easily gains the upper hand against Goku, with Goku struggling to keep up.
Goku is eventually able to heavily wound Frieza using a Spirit Bomb, calling on the energies of the entire planet Namek.
Believing the warlord dead, the heroes take the time to relax, not noticing that Frieza had emerged from the blast's crater, retaliating by mortally wounding Piccolo and murdering Krillin. Already bordering on the edge of his rage, Frieza threatening Gohan, pushes Goku over it, his rage exploding, causing Frieza to inadvertently create what he had always feared: A Super Saiyan.
In the ensuing battle, Frieza and Goku trade blows, but as the fight progresses, Frieza's power gradually diminishes with the repeated punishment. In frustration, Frieza sends a Death Ball into the core of the planet, starting a chain reaction that would destroy Namek in "five minutes". Frieza unleashes 100% of his power. Frieza is now able to launch a huge assault against the surprised Goku, who had not expected Frieza's power to be as high as it is. Goku and Frieza face off and eventually after a very long battle, Goku gets the battle under his control, and calls off the fight, claiming it would be pointless to continue; Frieza losing strength rapidly and Goku already having humbled the tyrant. Humiliated, Frieza refuses to relent, attacking Goku with two Tsuibi Kienzan. As Goku dodges the attacks, Frieza ironically becomes distracted long enough to be vivisected by his own attack.
Barely clinging to life but desperate to survive, Frieza begs and begs for mercy, which Goku hesitantly provides. Frieza's arrogance refuses to allow him to be beaten and saved by a Saiyan "monkey", and he expends what little energy he has left to attack Goku. Overcome with anger, Goku fires a Ki blast that consumes both Frieza and his attack, seemingly ending Frieza's reign over the universe.
Death of a great tyrant.
Unbeknownst to Goku, Frieza survived the destruction of Namek. Able to do nothing more than breathe, Frieza floated in the planet's debris, kept company only by his thoughts of how the universe's conqueror had been thoroughly beaten by a Saiyan. His father, King Cold, had crews search the area, not believing his son to have been killed by something as insignificant as the explosion of a planet. What could be found of Frieza was salvaged, his missing limbs and face reconstructed with cybernetic enhancements. Scarred and bitter - though feeling stronger than he had before. Frieza's first thought upon rehabilitation is revenge on those who sullied him.
Frieza beats Goku to Earth. Despite his ill intentions towards Earth and all who lived there, Frieza notes "It's a good planet" on first viewing "(Dragon Ball #330)". Frieza orders his henchmen to find and slaughter its inhabitants, with Frieza keen on killing his enemy's friends himself. However, his army is torn apart by the blade-wielding fighter Future Trunks. Frieza dismisses his challenger as an insolent child, and pays him almost no heed until the boy reveals himself as another Super Saiyan.
Dumbstruck, Frieza makes several different efforts to kill Trunks, each of which is parried easily. He then plays his trump card in the form of a Death Ball ten times the size of the one that destroyed Planet Namek. Even this is nonchalantly brushed away, until a mortified Frieza causes it to detonate with another shot of "ki". Thinking him to be destroyed by the assault, both the father and son are stunned when Trunks fires the Burning Attack out of nowhere. Fuming, Frieza becomes oblivious to his opponent's position, and is surprised and sliced in half by the Saiyan youth before being cut to pieces and blown to dust.
After his death.
After his death, Frieza makes numerous cameo appearances throughout the remainder of the series from Hell, including observing Goku's fight with Buu alongside other defeated villains from the series.
In "Dragon Ball GT", he teams up with Cell to act as a distraction for Goku while a horde of villains from the Z-Fighters' past escape Hell. Frieza traps Goku in the next world, but even allied with Cell, he is eventually defeated and remains in Hell.
Forms and transformations.
Over time, Frieza's power became so great that his body could not comfortably contain it, and a series of physical transformations were developed that limit his actual strength While changing shape from his "first-form", each alteration builds on the previous. In all, Frieza demonstrated four transformed states, each with increasing power (some larger than others and each resulting in different physical attributes).
In his first form, Frieza is a relatively short humanoid, albeit with a large chestnut-shaped skull with two horns. He also has a tail with a spiked end, as well as having three talon-like toes. He wears the same upper-body armor that many of his subordinates (including the Saiyans) are shown to wear, and while traveling, often gives the appearance of weakness by exclusively using his hoverchair for transportation, leaving his henchmen to do his "dirty work".
His second form is similar in appearance to the first, except much larger, both in height and muscle mass, Frieza claiming to have nearly doubled his power in this state. He also grows longer horns, which now instead of protruding sideways from his skull curve sharply upwards into near right angles. His armor cannot contain his form and shatters, leaving him with a new, white natural armor covering his chest and shoulders. In this form, he somewhat resembles his father King Cold.
Frieza's third form is again more brutish, with an extremely elongated skull. His facial features contort and change, with his nose melding into his mouth to form a crude beak. His original horns recede, and more now erupt in pairs along the length of his head. He walks and stands with a slight hunch, as if the strain of supporting his head was too much for even Frieza's own body to bear. This form vaguely resembles a Xenomorph from the Alien movies.
Drastically differing from his previous transformations, in his final form Frieza instead regresses, becoming shorter and less bulky, his horns and spikes disappear and his physique becomes streamlined. His skin becomes pure, solid white with purple sections on his head, shoulders, forearms, chest and shins.
Frieza is also able to attain 100% power, greatly increasing his muscle mass. At 100% this is literally the peak of Frieza's potential and the maximum amount of power his body can output; his muscle mass becomes engorged compared to his previously sleek frame. However, due to the strain on his body he can not fight at full capacity for long, slowly weakening whether he is dealing or receiving damage.
Physically ruined while caught in the Planet Namek's explosion after his defeat, what remained of the still-living Frieza was salvaged and rebuilt with cybernetic enhancements by scientists under the order of King Cold. The whole of the lower half of his body and right side of his face are replaced, with scarring and metal accouterments covering what little was left of his organic self. These enhancements allowed him to exceed the limits of power imposed by his fully organic form, though how much more powerful it made him is unknown.
Techniques and special abilities.
Yubisaki kara no Shogekiha "("Shockwave blast from the finger")"
Movies and specials.
"Dragon Ball Z: Bardock - The Father of Goku" - DBZ TV Special #1; released October 17, 1990
"Dragon Ball Z: Cooler's Revenge" - DBZ Movie #5; released July 21, 1991
"Dragon Ball Z: Fusion Reborn" - DBZ Movie #12; released March 4, 1995
In addition, Frieza's destruction of Planet Vegeta is shown from another point of view in "Burn Up!! A Close, Intense, Super-Fierce Battle" (DBZ Movie #8) and the mercenaries from "Super Deciding Battle for the Entire Planet Earth" (DBZ Movie #3) believe they would be strong enough to challenge Frieza after eating the fruit of the Tree of Might.
He also appears in footage from the Famicom game (and later Playdia remake) "Plan to Eradicate the Saiyans". In it Frieza seems to be somehow resurrected, with he and past villains Coola, Tullece, and Lord Slug attacking Goku and his friends. Once it's revealed these are merely ghost-warriors meant to distract the heroes, however, the false Frieza and his allies are easily dealt with.
Video games.
"All games are listed in chronological order of release."
