Fanta is a yellow lemonade. It was introduced in Germany in 1940. Fanta was created during World War II in Nazi Germany by the German Coca Cola (GmbH) bottling company. Because of the war, there was no shipping between Nazi Germany and the United States. Therefore, the German bottling plant could no longer get Coca Cola syrup. The CEO of the plant, Max Keith, needed to do something to keep the plant going. He came up with a fruit flavored drink made from whatever he could find. Using apple fiber left over from cider presses and whey, a byproduct from cheese manufacture, Fanta was created and became quite popular. The original German Fanta had a yellow color and a different flavor from that of Fanta Orange; the exact flavor varied throughout the war, depending on what ingredients were available.
The name 'Fanta' came during an employee contest to name the new beverage. Keith told them to let their Fantasie (German for imagination) run wild. On hearing that, salesman Joe Knipp spontaneously arrived upon the name "Fanta".
After the war, Fanta was introduced to the United States by Coca-Cola, and in 1960 they bought the trademark. Fanta Orange is the most popular Fanta flavor. It is available in 180 countries. In terms of volume, Brazil is the largest consumer of Fanta in the world. Fanta is more popular in Europe and South America than in the United States.
There are over 70 different flavors world-wide. Most of them are only available by region in some countries. For example, in Romania (and some other countries), there is "Fanta Shokata" based on the traditional Romanian drink "Socată". This drink is made from elderflower. In Switzerland and previously the Netherlands the local fruit, blackcurrant is used to produce Fanta as well. Some identical flavors have different names in different markets. The classic orange, for example, was renamed "Fanta Funky Orange" in 2003 for the Nordic countries and Belgium, while other countries retain the older "Fanta Orange" brand. As of the year 2005, the Fanta brand has been connected with the word "Bambaacha" (or "Bamboocha"), which is often seen in the Fanta commercials. TaB diet Cola was originally produced by the Fanta division of Coca-cola. It was available in a variety of non-cola flavors as well. Later in 2005, Fanta branched out into new Fanta Zero (diet versions) varieties in Great Britain.
