The First Fleet is the name given to the 11 ships which sailed from Great Britain on 13 May 1787 to start the first European colony in New South Wales. It was a convict settlement, the start of a plan to transport thousands of prisoners to Australia. The fleet was led by Captain (later Admiral) Arthur Phillip.
Carrying convicts.
There were 2 navy ships, 6 convict transports and 3 storeships. The private ships were on contract to the British Government. The contracts were organized by William Richards, a shipbroker (ship salesman) from Walworth. He also supplied the food and drink for the ships. Zachariah Clarke went with the Fleet to look after things for Richards.
The convict ships were set up in the same way as soldiers were transported. People slept in hammocks and there were tables for eating and stools to sit on. To keep the convicts secure, thick wooden walls were built across the deck (floor) from side to side. These had small holes in them so the guards could shoot in case of trouble. The hatches (doors up to the decks) were kept shut with cross bars, bolts and locks. Guards were always on duty at each hatch, and a guard with a gun was always on the quarter deck.
Food and drink.
As well as this food, there was sometimes rice, dried fish, and soup. When the ships were in a harbour there was also fresh meat and vegetables. Women and children were given a slightly different list of food. Sick people were also given wine and spirits.
When the Fleet arrived in Sydney, Arthur Phillip worked out they only had enough food for 49 weeks. He should have been given enough for 2 years.
Other supplies.
The Fleet also took a number of animals, plants and seeds. The animals included sheep, pigs, dogs, cats, goats, turkeys, geese, ducks, chickens, pigeons, horses, and cattle. Plants and seeds included coffee, cocoa, cotton, bananas, oranges, lemons, tamarinds, guava, prickly pear, eugenia or pomme rose, jalap, ipecacuanha, figs, bamboo, sugar cane, esparto grass, vines, quinces, apples, pears, strawberries, oaks, myrtles, rice, wheat, barley, and maize. Some of this was brought from England, and the rest from when the Fleet stopped at Rio de Janeiro and Capetown.
Arrival in Australia.
The first ship, "Supply", reached Botany Bay on 18 January 1788. Phillip soon decided that this site, picked by Sir Joseph Banks, was not suitable. It had poor soil, no safe place to leave the ships, and no drinking water. Phillip decided to go north to Port Jackson. On January 26 the marines and convicts landed at Sydney Cove. It was a successful trip, as only 40 convicts had died. Phillip named the settlement Sydney after Lord Sydney, the British government's Home Secretary.
1418 people left Portsmouth. On the voyage 22 babies were born. 69 people died or left the ships. 1373 people landed in Port Jackson which is now known as Sydney.
