The Fall of Man (also called "The Story of the Fall" or "The Fall") is the story in the book of Genesis in the Torah (Old Testament) of when Adam and Eve, in God's eyes, lost their innocence. Genesis says that Adam and Eve ate from the Tree of Knowledge even after God told them it was not allowed. Adam and Eve lost their innocence and were thrown out of the Garden of Eden, where the Tree of Knowledge was. In Christian religion, all of man lost their innocence because Adam and Eve disobeyed God and had to be punished, so man can now tell good from bad and life from death.
The Fall, for many Christians, means that humans could not make themselves holy enough to get into Heaven when they died. The only way they became able to get into Heaven is when, as they believe, Jesus Christ sacrificed himself and made it possible for people to get back into Heaven.
Beliefs.
Many people in Judaism, Christianity and Islam believe the story of the Fall as fact, but their explanations of it are sometimes different. The Fall is not talked about in The Old Testament, but Adam being thrown out of Eden is (in Genesis 3), and what happened in Genesis and what happened in the Qur'an are very different.
Judaism and Islam.
Judaism and Islam believe that The Fall was just a historic event and didn't change human nature at all. They believe that, because Adam ate from the Tree of Knowledge, he and his wife were thrown out of the Garden of Eden and forced to work and suffer. But God still gave others who were still loyal to him the chance to get into Heaven.
Christianity.
In general, Christians believe that everyone who was related to Adam was born with sin and would never make it into Heaven. Jesus, who was related to Adam only through his mother, and had no sin, died for everyone who had sin, cleaning them. They believe that whoever believed in Jesus Christ was given a "second chance" to get back into Heaven, shown in St. John's Gospel: "God so loved the world that he sent his only son (Jesus Christ) that whoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life". Some types of Christianity have slightly different ways of viewing this, described below.
Catholicism.
Catholicism believes that people are born sinful, but have free will, and so they can clean themselves of their sin and can get into Heaven.
Calvinism and Puritanism.
Calvanists believe that God chooses the humans who were going to go to Heaven and those who were not. Humans don't get a choice in "spiritual matters".
Puritans took this one step farther. Puritans said that humans could do nothing to be able to get to Heaven. They said that no matter how good a person was, if he hadn't been chosen by God at birth, he would not go to Heaven. However, one could lose the right to go to Heaven by being bad.
Protestants believe that when Jesus sacrificed himself, he made man free from sin forever. Other people believe that when Jesus sacrificed himself, man was free from sin but he wasn't certain that he would still get into Heaven.
Liberal Christianity.
Some Christians say that the story of The Fall in Genesis 3 never happened but is just a myth or story that the Israelite people used to show that the relationship that man had with God is gone.
This view is quite neutral towards history. It doesn't say that evolution is a lie and says Bible stories that man failed in the Garden of Eden and needed to be saved are explanations of deeper spiritual truths. Some also say that Jesus Christ was God trying to start a new relationship with man.
Eastern Orthodox.
Eastern Orthodoxy believes that a son is not guilty of the sins of his father (so sin isn't passed down from Adam). They believe that men and women are forced to sin because of the world around them and thy have to try and resist if they want to go to Heaven. But they still believe that Adam caused all humanity to have to work for this.
Pelagianism.
Pelagianism says that humans are capable of freely choosing good or bad decisions without God's help and that humans are not born with Adam's sin.
Mormonism.
Mormonism believes that The Fall was a plan thought up by God so that only His children could get into Heaven.
If one stuck to these rules, one would be considered "worthy" of Heaven.
Unification Church.
Unification Church believe that Adam and Eve had sexual relations before they were married, and so they got thrown out of the Garden of Eden. They believe that a Blessing Ceremony can "wash" this sin away.
Unitarian Church.
Unitarian and Unity Churches believe that "The Fall of Man" has an important meaning but that it is not a true historic event.
The Fall in books.
Philip Pullman wrote a series called "His Dark Materials" and he says in the book that The Fall was a good thing. It was when humans became free to learn. Pullman believes that it is not worth being innocent if the price is not knowing the truth.
C.S. Lewis wrote a book called "Perelandra" where Adam and Eve were on the planet Venus rather than the classic Garden of Eden.
Albert Camus wrote a book called "The Fall" where a man tells another man in a bar in Amsterdam called "Mexico City" why he didn't want to rescue a man who was trying to kill himself by jumping off a bridge into a canal.
In the manga (or comic-book) "Neon Genesis Evangelion", The Fall is often talked about, and at the end, an attempt to clean Adam's sin is performed and a new genesis is started.
