"Fell on Black Days" is a song by the American rock band Soundgarden, released in 1994 as the fifth single from the band's fourth studio album, "Superunknown" (1994). The song peaked at number four on the "Billboard" Mainstream Rock Tracks chart. It would later appear on the band's greatest hits album "A-Sides" and the 2007 Chris Cornell compilation "The Roads We Choose - A Retrospective".
Composition.
The song was written by frontman Chris Cornell. The time signature of the song is in 6/4.
Lyrics.
"Fell on Black Days" was like this ongoing fear I've had for years...It's a feeling that everyone gets. You're happy with your life, everything's going well, things are exciting - when all of a sudden you realise you're unhappy in the extreme, to the point of being really, really scared. There's no particular event you can pin the feeling down to, it's just that you realise one day that everything in your life is FUCKED!
Release and reception.
It was released as a single in a large number of different versions, each with different B-sides. Several of the singles featured an original demo version of the song. This demo is completely different from the more familiar version. It features different lyrics and music, with considerably heavier drop-D guitar. Only the chorus contains lyrical similarities to the final version. Soundgarden performed this version live on Pearl Jam's "Self-Pollution" radio broadcast in early 1995.
It appeared on "Billboard" magazine's Hot 100 Airplay chart, peaking at number 54 in its tenth week and remaining on the chart until its twentieth week. The song peaked at number four on the "Billboard" Mainstream Rock Tracks chart and number 13 on the "Billboard" Modern Rock Tracks chart.
Outside of the United States, the single was released in Australia and the United Kingdom. In Canada, the song reached the top 70 on the Canadian Singles Chart and remained in the top 70 for two weeks. "Fell on Black Days" reached the top 50 in the Netherlands and in Ireland it was a moderate top 20 success.
After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Clear Channel included the song on its list of possibly inappropriate songs.
Music video.
In the music video, the band was filmed performing the song in-studio, with Brendan O'Brien producing the recording. The video was directed by Jake Scott. The video was released in November 1994. It is available on the CD-ROM "Alive in the Superunknown". The video version of the track can be found on the "Fell on Black Days" single and "Songs from the Superunknown".
Live performances.
A live version of the song appears on the "Black Hole Sun" and "Fell on Black Days" singles.
In 2005, when Audioslave toured with Seether, Cornell sang "Fell on Black Days" with Shaun Morgan, Seether's lead vocalist.
Cover versions.
In 2006, Classic Case did a cover of "Fell on Black Days" on the band's "Black Unicorn" Split EP with "He is Legend".
