The Ford Motor Company (often known as Ford) is an American company that makes cars. It is named after its the man who made it, Henry Ford.
Ford's first car was made in 1908. It was called a Model T.
In 1896, Henry Ford had an idea to make a Quadricycle. It was the first "horseless carriage" that he built. It was very different from cars we drive now, and even from what he produced a few years later, but in a way it's the starting point of Ford's career as a businessman. Until the Quadricycle, Ford's tinkering had been experimental, theoretical—like the gas engine he built on his kitchen table in the 1890's, which was just an engine with nothing to power. Enough people liked the Quadricycle, and much could be done with the Quadricycle, that it started the beginning of Ford's business.
Ford Motor Company went into the business on June 16, 1903, when Henry Ford and 11 business helpers signed the company's beginning papers. The first Ford car, the Model A, was being sold in Detroit, Michigan a few months later. With $28,000 (around 16 000 pounds), the pioneering industrialists made what was to become one of the world's largest companies. Few places like Ford are as said to have shaped the history and development of industry and society in the 20th century as Ford Motor Company.
Mass production on the line.
Perhaps Ford Motor Company's single greatest contribution to automotive manufacturing was the moving assembly line. First implemented at the Highland Park plant (in Michigan, US) in 1913, the new technique allowed individual workers to stay in one place and perform the same task repeatedly on multiple vehicles that passed by them. The line proved tremendously efficient, helping the company far surpass the production levels of their competitors—and making the vehicles more affordable.
The first vehicles.
Henry Ford insisted that the company's future lay in the production of affordable cars for a mass market. Beginning in 1903, the company began using the first 19 letters of the alphabet to name new cars. In 1908, the Model T was born. 19 years and 15 million Model T's later, Ford Motor Company was a giant industrial complex that spanned the globe. In 1925, Ford Motor Company acquired the Lincoln Motor Company, thus branching out into luxury cars, and in the 1930's, the Mercury division was created to establish a division centered on mid-priced cars. Ford Motor Company was growing.
