Frédéric Chopin (February 22 or March 1 1810 - October 17 1849) was a Polish virtuoso pianist who composed some of the greatest piano music ever performed. He is the most important composer from Poland. Some of his music for the piano is very difficult to play, but it is admired as some of the most poetic music ever written. He planned to have a concert on New Year's day 1.1.1850 but he died before he could perform on his special day.
Chopin was born in the village of Żelazowa Wola, 60 km from Warsaw. His father Mikołaj (Nicolas) Chopin was French. He moved to Poland in 1787 where he married Tekla Justyna Krzyżanowska. They named their son Fryderyk Franciszek. Sometimes Chopin's date of birth is given as February 22 because this is what his birth paper says, but this was written by the priest at Chopin's christening eight weeks later and was probably a mistake. Chopin and his family always celebrated his birthday on March 1.
Chopin's musical ability was clear when he was very young, and newspapers in Warsaw described him as a "second Mozart". He was given private music lessons by several important musicians.
In 1829, Chopin heard the violinist Niccolò Paganini play, and met the pianist Johann Nepomuk Hummel. He also visited Vienna, where he played a couple of concerts. In December he performed his piano concerto in E minor. He first performed his other piano concerto, in F minor, in March 1830.
In 1830 he visited Vienna again, and when he heard of the troubles of the November Uprising back home he decided not to go back to Poland. He went to Paris instead, and made his home there. He started calling himself by the French version of his name, "Frédéric François". In Paris he made friends with some other important composers, including Hector Berlioz, Felix Mendelssohn, Charles-Valentin Alkan, and Vincenzo Bellini.
In 1836 Chopin was going to be married to a Polish girl called Maria Wodzinska. Her family did not like Chopin very much. Her mother made the couple keep their love secret, and finally stopped them from getting married. At about this time Chopin met the woman writer Amandine-Aurore-Lucile Dupin, the Baroness Dudevant, better known as George Sand. Eventually Chopin started a relationship with her that lasted until 1847. They visited Mallorca together in the winter of 1838-1839, where the bad weather and damp rooms made Chopin ill. He had breathing problems before, but this was so bad that they had to come home. He never got completely better.
In 1847 Chopin and Sand split up. In 1848 he visited England and Scotland to play in concerts, but he was very ill and had to return home. He died in Paris, at about 2 o'clock in the morning on October 17 1849, surrounded by loved ones.
Nearly all of the pieces of music written by Chopin are for the piano as the main instrument. He wrote piano sonatas (of which the "Funeral March" sonata is very famous), two piano concertos, studies, ballades, nocturnes, mazurkas, polonaises, waltzes, and a set of preludes. His music was praised in his lifetime. Robert Schumann once wrote about Chopin, "Hats off, gentlemen! A genius." Nowadays every skillful pianist has probably played some Chopin, and audiences really enjoy listening to it.
