In mathematics, logic, and computer science, a formal language is a language that is defined in a precise mathematical way. A language is defined using a set called the alphabet of the language. The members of the alphabet are usually called "symbols" of the language. The language is a set of sequences of symbols of the alphabet. The sequences usually have finite length. The sequences that are members of the language are called the "words" of the language or "strings".
a formal language formula_1 is typically characterized as an ordered pair of sets formula_2. formula_3 is the alphabet, and each element of formula_4 is a sequence of elements.
In the first case, the set formula_3 is called the "alphabet" of formula_1, and the elements of formula_7 are called "words". In the second, the set formula_3 is called the "lexicon" or the "vocabulary" of formula_7, while the elements of formula_7 are then called "sentences". The mathematical theory that treats formal languages in general is known as "formal language theory".
Although it is common to hear the term "formal language" meaning natural language that is more stilted, disciplined or precise than everyday speech, this article refers to the meaning in formal language theory, in maths, logic or computer science.
As an example of formal language, an alphabet might be formula_11. One string over that alphabet is formula_12.
A typical language over that alphabet, containing that string, would be the set of all strings which contain the same number of symbols formula_13 and formula_14.
The empty word (that is, length-zero string) is allowed and is often denoted by formula_15, formula_16 or formula_17. While the alphabet is a finite set and every string has finite length, a language may very well have infinitely many member strings. This is because the length of words belonging to it may be unbounded.
A question often asked about formal languages is "how difficult is it to decide whether a given word belongs to a particular language?"
This is the kind of question that computability theory and complexity theory ask.
