The Grail Sword is a mythological sword which has unclear origins as the Holy Grail (holy cup) itself.
History.
Most of the legends say that the origin of the Grail begins with the Crusades (holly wars in medieval period). Other legends say that it is older, coming from Celtic tradition.
It was eventually found by Gawain, broken in two pieces; his quest subsequently was to mend the sword, which he did by taking it to its place of origin, the forge of Wayland. Perceval had a similar quest to mend the sword. It is natively associated with the Sword of Light, or the Sword of Nuadu, the original Celtic Wounded King.
First theory.
The first theory is the legend of the Holy Grail, which was included more holy objects (relics). There are four of them: the first was the holy plate used by Christ at the Last Supper; the second was the spear with which the soldiers tried to hit Jesus on the cross; the third was the Grail (cup) itself; and the last was the Sword of King David (father of King Solomon). It was also called the Grail Sword.
Second theory.
The second theory said that the Grail Sword sword belonged to a Celtic 'Wounded King' and was also known as 'The Sword of Light', or 'The Sword of Nuadu'. The sword was found by 'Gawain' and it was broken into two places. Gawain was the one to find it's place of origin. The Sword of Nuadu was made in the city of Findias (Irish "white") byt he druid Uiscias (tribe). Nuadu himself was the King of the de Danann Gods. He very often is represented with a sword in his hands. The sword replaced his arm, which he lost in the battle.
Uses.
The Templar Knights were the ones who always looked for these holy objects. They used cruel methods to obtain many of the art works considered holy. Some of them did it for money others to bring fame to their towns.
King Arthur himself wanted to obtain the Grail Sword to bring England to its past glory, when England was not under the power of Roman Empire.
The Grail Sword was considered very powerful. It was believed that the owner of this sword would be victorious in any circumstances. It also was considered a sword of justice. - 'God's hand'.
