The Great Barrier Reef is the world's largest coral reef. It is located close to the coast of Queensland, Australia. It is 2,300 km long. It is made up of nearly 3000 coral reefs and over 600 islands. It has been listed an important World Heritage Site by UNESCO. The Great Barrier Reef is the largest structure made by living things. It can be seen from outer space.
Captain Cook.
James Cook discovered the reef on 11 June 1770. His ship the Endeavour crashed into the reef. The coral ripped a large hole in the bottom of his ship. Cook and the crew were able to keep the ship from sinking. They were able to get the ship onto a beach at what is now called Cooktown. His crew took 7 weeks to repair the ship and continue the voyage.
Geology.
The Reef Research Centre has found the remains of coral that are half a million years old. Corals have been growing in the region for as long as 25 million years. The corals have not always formed coral reefs.
It is difficult to work out the age of the Great Barrier Reef. This is because of the way a reef can grow and shrink as the sea level changes. A coral reef can grow in diameter, that is how wide they are, from 1 to 2 cm per year. They can also grow upwards from 1 to 15 cm per year. Coral can't grow if the water is too deep (150 metres or more) because it needs light from the sun. They cannot grow out of the water (above sea level).
The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority and Australian Institute of Marine Science say the current, living reef started growing about 20,000 years ago. It started to grow on an older reef. This makes the beginning of the reef during the Last Glacial Maximum. At that time, the sea level was 120 metres lower than it is today. The land that forms the bottom of the Great Barrier Reef was a coastal plain. The plain had some large hills. Some of these hills were parts of older reefs.
From 20,000 years ago until 6,000 years the sea level began to rise. As it rose, the corals could grow higher on the hills of the coastal plain. By 13,000 years ago the sea level was 60 metres lower than the present day. Corals began to grow around the hills of the coastal plain. These became continental islands. As the sea level rose higher, most of these continental islands were covered by water. The corals could then grow over the hills. This formed the present cays and reefs. Sea level on the Great Barrier Reef has not risen much in the last 6,000 years.The CRC Reef Research Centre has worked out that the present, living reef is 6,000 to 8,000 years old.
The remains of a very old barrier reef has been found in the Kimberley area. This is in the northern part of Western Australia.
The Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area has been divided into 70 different areas. These are called bioregions. Each bioregion has its own special plants and animals. There are 30 reef bioregions, and 40 are non-reef bioregions. In the northern part of the Great Barrier Reef, there are ribbon reefs and deltaic reefs. These kinds of reef are not found in the rest of the Great Barrier Reef system.
Ecology.
The Great Barrier Reef has many different plants and animals. This includes many vulnerable or endangered species. Some of these can only be found on this reef system.
Mammals.
Thirty species of whales, dolphins, and porpoises have been seen in the Great Barrier Reef. This includes the dwarf minke whale, Indo-Pacific humpback dolphin, and the humpback whale. Many dugongs live there.
Turtles and Dugongs.
Six species of sea turtles come to the reef to breed. These are the green sea turtle, leatherback sea turtle, hawksbill turtle, loggerhead sea turtle, flatback turtle, and the olive ridley. There are two different groups of green sea turtles on the Great Barrier Reef. One group lives in the northern part of the reef and the other in the south. Fifteen species of seagrass attract the dugongs and turtles. They also provide a food and shelter for fish. The most common kinds of seagrasses are "Halophila" and "Halodule".
Other sea animals.
Salt water crocodiles live in mangrove and salt marshes on the coast near the reef. No crocodile nests have been found on the reef. The salt water crocodiles on the reef travel long distances. There are not many living around the reef. Around 125 species of shark, stingray, skates or chimera live on the reef. About 5,000 species of mollusc have been found on the reef. These include the giant clam, nudibranchs and cone snails. Forty-nine species of pipefish and nine species of seahorse have been found. Seven species of frogs have be found on the islands.
Birds.
215 species of birds come to the reef or nest or roost on the islands. This includes 22 species of seabirds and 32 species of shorebirds. These include the white-bellied sea eagle and roseate tern. Most nesting sites are on islands in the northern and southern regions of the Great Barrier Reef. About 1.7 million birds use the sites to breed.
Plants.
The islands of the Great Barrier Reef also have 2,195 known plant species. Three of these are not found anywhere else. The northern islands have 300-350 plants which are woody. The southern islands have 200 plants which are herbaceous. The Whitsunday region has the most (1,141) plant speciess. The plant species are spread by birds.
Sea snakes.
Seventeen types of sea snake live on the Great Barrier Reef. They take about 4 years to become old enough to breed. They usually live on the sea floor. They live in warm waters up to deep. They are more common in the southern part of the reef.
Fish, ascidians and bryozoans.
More than 1,500 species of fish live on the reef. These include the clownfish,, and several types of snapper and coral trout. There are at least 330 species of sea squirts (ascidians) found on the reef. These vary in size from 1 mm-10 cm in diameter. Between 300-500 species of bryozoans are found on the reef system. These are small water animals that look like moss, or branches.
Corals.
Four hundred species of corals, both hard corals and soft corals are found on the reef. Most of these spawn (release thousands of eggs) in huge events. This spawning is controlled by the rising sea temperatures. This happens in spring and summer, as part of the moons lunar cycle, and the day/night diurnal cycle. Reefs in the inner Great Barrier Reef spawn during the week after the full moon in October. Outer reefs spawn in November and December. The common soft corals on the Great Barrier Reef belong to 36 different types. Five hundred species of marine algae or seaweed live on the reef. This includes thirteen types of "Halimeda". These deposit chalky (calcareous) mounds up to 100 metres wide. They have mini-ecosystems on their surface which have been compared to rainforest cover.
