Grime is a genre of urban music which first emerged in London in the early 2000s, primarily a development of UK garage, drum and bass, dancehall and hip hop.[1]
Grime music can usually be defined by the beat of the music-130-145 beats per minute, and the strong London accent rapping in a fast and aggressive style.Grime is sometimes associated with dubstep, a similar but largely instrumental genre which also evolved from the early 2000s UK garage scene.
Origins and development.
Grime originated from the UK, mainly in London. Many of the artists found their success in the underground first before gaining mainstream attention.
Examples of the sound can be heard in the late 20th century, with tracks by So Solid Crew, More Fire Crew's "Oi", and Sticky's "Boo" which featured Ms. Dynamite. This indicated the movement of UK Garage away from its R'n'B and hip-hop influences towards darker themes and sounds.
Dizzee Rascal and Wiley(both former Roll Deep members) were possibly the first artists to bring the genre to the media's attention with their two albums "Boy in Da Corner" and"Treddin' On Thin Ice" respectively. Among the first tracks to be recognised as grime were "Eskimo" by Wiley who was the founder of the "Eskibeat" label and "Pulse X" by Musical Mob.
Dizzee Rascal achieved broad critical and commercial acclaim, with Boy in Da Corner eventually winning the 2003 Mercury Music Prize. Grime has received a lot of exposure from television stations including Channel U, Logan Sama's show on London station Kiss FM and the BBC's youth oriented digital radio station1Xtra.
International growth.
The 2005 release of 679 Recordings' "Run the Road" compilation, showcased some of the most popular grime releases to that point, increasing the popularity and fame of grime and grime artists internationally. A particularly notable grime artist who has had success overseas is Lady Sovereign, who reached #1 on MTV's TRL, appeared on "Late Show with David Letterman", and is now signed to Jay-Z's Roc-A-Fella Records.
