The Game Boy Advance is a handheld video game console made by Nintendo which can play Game Boy games and Game Boy Color games. Sometimes "GBA" is used instead of the full name. There are three versions: the original, SP, and the Micro.
The original version is horizontal and uses AA batteries. The SP (released in 2003) was the first Game Boy to have a rechargeable battery. People had an AC adapter that they could plug in instead of having to buy new batteries. The Micro was released in 2005 and is very small.
Before the Advance, Nintendo had released the Game Boy and Game Boy Color. After this console they released the Nintendo DS in November 2004.
People were able to buy it in Japan on 21 March 2001. Nintendo released it in North America on 11 June 2001 and for Europe on 22 June 2001.
After the release of the seventh-generation game systems (Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation Portable, Wii, and PlayStation 3), games slowly stopped being made for any sixth-generation systems. These included the Game Boy Advance, as well as the Xbox, GameCube, and PlayStation 2.
Game Boy Advance SP.
The Game Boy Advance SP is a small, pocket-size machine that can be used to play video games. It is part of a series of pocket-size video game machines ("handhelds") called the Game Boy series. Just before the Game Boy Advance SP, there was another "Game Boy" called the Game Boy Advance. The Game Boy Advance SP is better than the Game Boy Advance in a few ways. First it has a "clamshell" design, which means that it can be folded up to make it smaller. It also has a new light so the user can see the screen better. The Game Boy Advance SP is made by Nintendo.
To play a video game on the Game Boy Advance SP, the player needs to buy a game separately. The games come in small "cartridges" -- small boxes that have computer chips inside them. The cartridge have to be put into the hole in the back of the Game Boy Advance SP, to make it possible to play the game. The actions or characters in the game are controlled with the controls, which are on the front of the console, just below the screen.
No games were made specifically for the SP.
Game Boy Micro.
Game Boy Micro was the last Game Boy handheld by Nintendo. It is another Game Boy Advance remake (like the Game Boy Advance SP). It is much smaller than the other Game Boys and has a much brigher screen than the SP. However, it can only play Game Boy Advance games, whereas the original and the SP could play Game Boy and Game Boy Color games.
No games were made specifically for the Micro, just like the SP.
