A grand duchy is a country whose head of state is a Grand Duke or Grand Duchess.
The only grand duchy in existence today is Luxembourg. Luxembourg became a grand duchy in 1815 when the Netherlands became an independent kingdom, and King William I of the Netherlands was made Grand Duke of KLuxembourg. In 1890 the two countries separated. William III of the Netherlands had no male heir, so in the Netherlands he was succeeded by Queen Wilhelmina but Luxembourg followed Salic law, which meant only a man could rule. The present Grand Duke of Luxembourg is Henri.
However there are other houses of Europe that style themselves as Grand Dukes even if not wholly recognised by the rest of society.
The independent republics of Finland and Lithuania, and the Dutch province Limburg (Duchy of Limburg) have been Grand Duchies at certain times in their history.
The title and origins of grand duchies.
The title Grand Duke (Latin: "Magnus Dux", German: "Großherzog", Italian: "Gran Duca", French: "Grand-Duc", Swedish: "Storhertig", Lithuanian:"Didysis kunigaikštis", Polish: "Wielki książę", Czech: "Velkovévoda") ranks in honour below King but higher than a sovereign Duke ("Herzog") or Prince ("Fürst").
A Grand Duke (or Grand Duchess) is a person who rules a Grand Duchy. But in the English language "Grand Duke" can also mean a type of prince who does not rule a country, but is related to the monarch. In the Russian language "Velikiy Knjaz" are "Grand Princes", relatives of the Tsar, other princes were nobleman who ranked above a duke. English says Grand Duke instead of Grand Prince.
List of grand duchies.
A lot of grand duchies were created in the Napoleonic era and by the Congress of Vienna and the German Confederation.
The Duchy of Warsaw(1807-1813) is sometimes called a Grand Duchy but it was not.
Today Luxembourg is the only remaining grand duchy. However some old Grand Duchies still retain the titles granted to them usually in the Congress of Vienna.
Form of address.
Most reigning Grand Dukes were called "Royal Highness". Titles e styfor other members of the families were different. In Hesse-Darmstadt and in Baden, junior members were called "Grand Ducal Highness".
The only current grand ducal family in existence, Luxembourg, styles calls its junior members "Royal Highnesses", but they were also Princes of Parma.
A Russian Grand Duke or Grand Duchess was an "Imperial Highness".
