Garhi Yasin is a town located in the north of Sindh province of Pakistan. It is the second largest town of the district Shikarpur. The town has a population of more than 14,000. Garhi Yasin is located on the right bank of River Indus. The area has always been important as a part of the traderoute through the Bolan Pass.
The town is named after its founder, Yasin Khan Pathan. Sindhi is the common language of the people in this region. The population of the town includes members of many different tribes. These tribes include the Pathan, Memon, Soomra, Shaikh, Syed, Mirani, Qazi, Bhutta, Abra, Channa, Lashari, Bhatti, Dinari, Mahar, Kakepota, Brohi and others. Beside a large number of Hindu, Punjabi and some Muhajirs (from India) also live in the town. The people live here without any discrimination of caste, color, language and religion.
Pride of Garhi Yasin.
There are several people from Garhi Yasin who are well known.
Garhi Yasin has always been given importance by the civilian and military governments of Pakistan. The political representatives from the town have held many important positions in the many different governments. Ghous Bux Khan Mahar, the current MNA from Garhi Yasin, is a former Federal Minister and Speaker of Sindh Assembly. Agha Siraj Khan Durrani, Provincial Minister of Sindh, is also from this town. Agha Atta Muhammad Khan, Moula Bux Soomro (father of former speaker of the National Assembly), Mir Altaf Khan Bhayo, Nadir Hussain Khan Kamario, Sardar Himat Khan Kamario, Zulfiqar Khan Kamario are elected representatives (MPAs or MNAs) from Garhi Yasin.
Education.
The town has a secondary school, three high schools, several primary schools, a Mono Technique School and many vocational schools (in fields of study such as typing, Commercial and Computer).
Economy.
The area has both an industrial and agricultural economy.
Agriculture.
Much of the area is irrigated. Major productions of the area are rice, wheat and pulses. Other crops including maize, sugarcane, vegetables and fruits are also grown.
Industry.
The town has a small market. Many different items are made in the town. These include handicrafts, metalware, furniture, bricks and pottery. Hand loom weaving of the area used to be very popular.
Geography.
The area the town is located on is mainly an alluvial plain (flood plain). The Sukkur Barrage, built in the 1920s and 1930s, cause much damage the the land in this area.
The climate is very hot and dry.
