The Grey Wolf or Gray Wolf ("Canis lupus"), also known as the timber wolf or simply wolf, is a mammal of the order Carnivora. There are many different wolf subspecies, such as the Arctic Wolf. Many wolves are listed on the endangered species list.
Physiology and Appearance.
Adult wolves are usually between 1.3m to 2m in length from nose to tail. They usually weigh between 20kg and 68kg. The biggest wolf ever found weighed 79kg. Wolves have fur made up of two layers. The top layer is resistant to dirt, and the underlayer is water resistant. The colour of their fur can be any combination of grey, white, red, brown, and black.
Life.
Wolves live in groups called "packs". The members of the pack are often family members. The leaders are called the alpha male and the alpha female. Young wolves are called "cubs" or "wolf cubs". Adult females usually give birth to five or six cubs in a litter.
Wolves make a noise called a "howl". They howl to communicate with each other from far away. Sometimes they howl because they feel like it. They also communicate through complicated body language.
Diet.
Wolves are carnivores and eat other animals including caribou, antelope, deer, bison, yak, rodents and in some cases, moose. Some wolves have been seen eating salmon, seal, beached whales and birds.
Habitat.
Wolves are found in Europe, Asia and North America. They can live in forests, deserts, mountains, tundra, grasslands and, sometimes, around towns and cities.
Wolves and Humans.
Even though many people think that wolves are terrible, mean creatures, they are actually very gentle. The main reason wolves become violent is for food or to protect other wolves in the pack. Many people around the world, especially in Canada and Alaska, have wolves as pets.
A few years ago wolves were put back into Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming. The wolves have been very successful in the park. There had been no wolves there for a long time. Many people were not happy about this because they were afraid that the wolves would eat the sheep and cows near the park. However, wolves only eat livestock when they can't find wild prey.
