Answers to the God Paradox.
The God paradox is a good example of a philosophical problem. There are many answers and not only one "correct" answer. This section has some answers to the paradox.
God cannot do the illogical.
What is involved in this question is largely a definition game. As soon as you give a mountain the designation "too heavy to lift," you have made a hypothetical object that by its very definition is unliftable. It has no set size or weight. Its only characteristic is its inability to be lifted. Logically then, no amount of power can lift this mountain or it ceases to be. The issue then,is not really with the power of God to lift or create but with God's ability to do the illogical, such as lift the unliftable. Once an object is defined as unliftable, no amount of even infinite power can lift it.
Secondly, the other issue here presupposes that God can only make mountains so large and asks if God can make one large enough to be "unliftable". This again is a definitional problem, not a power problem. It presupposes an end to infinite power. This is illogical.
Can God make an unliftable mountain? No because such a thing is illogical, not because it is too big or too hard to make.
Can God fail to lift an unliftable mountain? No because there is no such thing as an end to God's "lifting power".
Much like God's inability to make up-downs or red-blues or light-darks or married bachelors, God cannot do the illogical or impossible.
God CAN do the "illogical".
The above argument falls short because it assumes that God is bound by the same logic as we humans know it and that he is a part of the same universe we live in. But our universe, our world is according to some religions like Christianity his very own creation. This includes the inherent logic, physics and mathematics of this universe. Thus the aboved proposed solution to the discussed oxymoron is a concept which in itself generates even more oxymorons. If God is the all mighty creator of this universe he has also created its physical laws and the logic we use for this discussion. So by the very definition of God there are no "illogical" or "impossible" things for him to do because that would limit his almightiness.
This oxymoron cannot be resolved. The only answer is that either God does not exist or we humans cannot resolve this oxymoron because we are not able to grasp the nature of God.
God does not follow human ideas.
God does not have to follow our ideas of what is true and what is false. He can choose for something to be true and false at the same time.
An answer from analytical philosophy.
In analytical philosophy, problems can be solved by breaking it into smaller pieces. One solves each of the small problems.
If 4 is true "or" false, fact 1 is disproved. Illustrating God paradox does make sense, or that omnipotence (being able to do anything) is impossible.
This rather simple language of logic (Primitive) does indeed rely on 1,2 and 3 all being true, therefore 4 must be true, if it is false then either 1,2 or 3 must also be false.
References.
These references were taken from the English article. They may not be simple to understand.
