Doctor Hannibal Lecter is a fictional serial killer. He is a character in many books by the crime drama writer Thomas Harris. Many of these books have been made into movies. Lecter is a cannibal. He eats other people. Anthony Hopkins is the actor most well know for playing Lector. He did so in the three movies. In 1992, he won the Academy Award and BAFTA Film Award for Best Actor for playing Lecter in the 1991 movie version of "The Silence of the Lambs".
"Silence of the Lambs".
Lecter was first writen about in Harris' novel "The Silence of the Lambs". This book became which became very popular. The book is about an FBI agent named Clarice Starling. Starling is trying to catch a serial killer, named "Buffalo Bill". Buffalo Bill killed his victims and removed their skin. Starling goes to the prison where Lecter is at to talk to him. She tried to understand the mind of a serial killer. She things this will help her catch Buffalo Bill. In the end, Starling catches "Bill", but Lecter escapes from prison.
"Hannibal".
Harris' next novel was "Hannibal". It was a sequel to "Silence of the Lambs". The book told the story about what happened to Hannibal Lecter after he escaped from prison. Lector was hiding in France. He used a false name and driver's license so he would not be caught. The book is about a victim of his, named Mason Verger. Verger survived when Lecter tried to eat his face. He now wants to get revenge on Lector. Mason Verger captures Lecter. He tries to kill him with attack hogs, but Lecter escapes. Lecter was played by Hopkins in the 2001 movie.
"Red Dragon".
"Red Dragon" was the third novel in the series. The story takes place before "Silence of the Lambs". It shows Lecter committing the crimes that got him in prison in the first place. These include stalking, killing, and eating his victims. It also shows him helping a policeman named Will Graham. Graham is trying to catch another killer named Francis Dolarhyde. Lector is helping him in the same way that he did Starling in "Silence of the Lambs"). Two movies were made based on this book. "Manhunter" (1986) starred Brian Cox as Lecter. "Red Dragon" (2002) starred Hopkins
"Hannibal Rising".
The final book in the series was "Hannibal Rising". It shows Lecter as a child. It tries to explain why he is a murderous cannibal. The critics did not like "Hannibal Rising" as much as they liked the first three books. This was mainly because people thought that the was unrealistic. They also felt it was not true to the characters. Thomas Harris has said in many interviews that he only wrote the book because he was afraid that someone else would write a book about Lecter as a child. He wanted to do it himself so no one else could. The 2007 movie based on the book starred Aaran Thomas (Lecter - age 8) and Gaspard Ulliel as Lecter.
Impact on popular culture.
The character of Hannibal Lecter has become very popular in American culture. This is mainly because he is so scary. Lecter is often thought to be one of the best movie villains of all time, next to Freddy Krueger and Norman Bates. AFI listed him at #1 on their list "Top 50 Movie Villians of All Time"
