"The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark" is a play by William Shakespeare. It is one of his best-known plays, and many lines have become famous quotations. The play is often just called "Hamlet".
"Hamlet" was written between 1600 and 1602, and first printed in 1603.
Story.
Hamlet is the son of the King of Denmark. When Hamlet's father dies, his uncle Claudius becomes king and marries Hamlet's mother (Gertrude). Hamlet's father appears as a ghost and tells Hamlet that he was murdered by Claudius. Hamlet is not sure that the ghost is really his father. He gets some travelling actors to perform a play which shows the murder of a king in the same way Hamlet's father said he was killed. When Claudius reacts badly to seeing this, Hamlet believes he is guilty.
Hamlet tells his mother that he knows about the murder. While there he kills Polonius, who is the king's advisor, because he thinks he is Claudius. Claudius sends Hamlet to England to have him killed, but his ship is attacked by pirates who take Hamlet prisoner but then return him to Denmark.
Ophelia is the daughter of Polonius. She was going to marry Hamlet, but seeing Hamlet acting mad and killing her father drives her mad. She falls into a river and drowns. Hamlet returns just as her funeral is happening. Laertes, her brother, decides to kill Hamlet in revenge. He challenges Hamlet to a sword fight, and puts poison on his own sword. Claudius makes some poisoned wine for Hamlet to drink in case that does not work.
At first Hamlet wins the sword fight, but his mother drinks the poisoned wine without knowing, and dies. Hamlet is cut with the poisoned sword, but then stabs Laertes with the same sword. Laertes tells Hamlet about the plot and then dies. Hamlet kills Claudius with the poisoned sword. Horatio, Hamlet's friend, tells everyone about the murder of the old king. Hamlet tells everyone that the Norwegian prince, Fortinbras, should be king, and then dies from the poison.
Meaning.
Scholars can not agree on what this story is about, even for very simple things, like if Hamlet is a good or bad man, if he loves Ophelia, if Ophelia is a virgin, if Polonius knows about king Hamlet's murder, and so on. Scholars also disagree on why characters do what they do, and what Shakespeare wants to tell us with this story. It is the most written about story of Shakespeare's, and maybe of any story at all.
Acting Hamlet.
Hamlet is one of the most difficult parts for an actor to perform. It is one of the largest roles written by Shakespeare. There are many disagreements about what Hamlet is really thinking. For many actors, playing Hamlet is one of the most important parts of their career.
