Hurricane Vince was one of the strangest hurricanes ever to form in the Atlantic Ocean. Vince was the twentieth named storm and twelfth hurricane of the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season.
Vince formed from a non-tropical system on October 8. It became a subtropical storm southeast of the Azores. The National Hurricane Center did not officially name the storm until the next day. This was shortly before Vince became a hurricane for a very short time. Vince made a record for being the first tropical cyclone to make landfall on the Iberian Peninsula on October 11. Vince then quickly dissipated over Spain.
Storm history.
Hurricane Vince originally began as an unnamed subtropical storm that went unnoticed by the National Hurricane Center. On October 5, it was then absorbed by a frontal low. But on October 8, the system began to become organized and became different subtropical storm. The National Hurricane Center didn't want to name the storm "Vince" since they thought the waters were too cold for a tropical cyclone.
But the storm began to become more tropical and was officially named Tropical Storm Vince on October 9. Vince became a weak Category 1 hurricane for a short time before it weakened back into a tropical storm. Vince later made landfall on Spain on October 11 and quickly died out.
Impact.
While Vince did not kill any people and caused no damages to Spain, the highest winds recorded on land were 77 km/h (48 mph) at Jerez, Spain, though some ships recorded stronger winds. Similar to non-tropical weather systems, Vince poured about 1 to 2 inches of rain over southern Spain.
Records and naming.
Although Hurricane Vince was a very small and short-lived storm, it is famous for developing in the northeastern Atlantic off the Moroccan coast, usually far away from where tropical cyclones usually are. It is the farthest northeast a tropical cyclone had ever developed in the Atlantic (32.9°N 20.6°W); previously the record was held by Ivan from 1980, at 35.6°N and 24.6°W. Anyhow, Vince is not the most northerly-forming or the most easterly-forming Atlantic tropical storm; these records are held by Alberto from 1988 at 41.5°N, and Ginger from 1967 at 18.1°W, respectively.
Hurricane Vince developed into a "hurricane" further east than any known storm at 18.9°W. Vince is the first tropical cyclone on record to have made landfall on the Iberian Peninsula, after coming ashore near Huelva, Spain.
When Subtropical Storm Vince formed on October 8, it was the earliest ever in the season that the twenty-first tropical or subtropical storm had developed, 38 days ahead of the previous record held by Tropical Storm 21 from 1933. Hurricane Vince was also the first named "V" storm in the Atlantic since naming began in 1950. Because Vince barely caused any damages or killed any people, its name was not retired by the World Meteorological Organization and will be on the list of alphabetical names for tropical cyclones for the 2011 season.
