Haiti (French: "Haïti"; Haitian Creole: "Ayiti"), officially the Republic of Haiti (French: "République d'Haïti"; Haitian Creole: "Repiblik d Ayiti") is a country on the Caribbean island of Hispaniola; the other country on the island is the Dominican Republic. There are two official language: French and Haitian Creole, or "Kreyol".The capital city of Haiti is Port-au-Prince.
It has a tropical climate, and is called in French "La Perle des Antilles" (The pearl of the Antilles), because of its natural beauty. It is very mountainous, but is no longer covered with forests, as it once was. It is the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere.
Haiti is divided into ten "departements". There are two official languages, French and Haitian creole, or "Kreyol". The main religion is Roman Catholic, however Voodoo, derived from African folk beliefs in Benin, is still widely practised also. There are many holidays; the largest and most important is the "Mardi Gras".
History.
The native Arawak Amerindians - who lived in the island of Hispaniola when it was discovered by Columbus - were brutally killed by Spanish conquistadors within twenty-five years.
In the early 17th century, the French established a colony on Hispaniola, and in 1697, Spain sold to the French the western third of the island, Haiti. The French colony, based on forestry and sugar-related industries, became one of the wealthiest in the Caribbean, but only through bringing many African slaves and destroying much of the environment.
In the late 18th century, Haiti's nearly half million slaves revolted under Toussaint L'Ouverture, and after a hard and bloody struggle, became the first black republic to declare its independence in 1804. Today there are many historic monuments remembering this; one of the largest is "La Citadelle Laferriere".
Departments.
Haiti is made of ten regions known as departments (French: "départments", singular "départment"). These departments are further divided into 41 "arrondissements", and 133 "communes", second and third level units of administration.
Holidays.
Official holidays (on the same day every year)
Traditional and religious holidays (dates vary according to the liturgical calendar of the Catholic Church)
