Hormones are biological chemicals that are found in plants and animals. Hormones are produced by living cells.They are used to send messages to other cells. These messages can be sent to nearby cells or to far-away cells. If a cell wants to send a message to a nearby cell, it puts the hormone into the tissue around it. If an animal's cell wants to send a message to a far-away cell, it puts the hormone into the blood. When a hormone is put in the blood it goes to all parts of the animal's body. Sometimes the cell that gets the message can even be the same cell that made the hormone (and sent the message.)
The cell or tissue that gets the message is called the "target cell".
Many different kinds of cells can send a message. There are some kinds of cells whose main job is to make hormones. When many of these cells are together in one place, it is called a "gland". Glands are groups of cells that make something and release it (put it outside the cell). Some glands make hormones.
Endocrine means something that is made by cells and released "into" the blood or tissue. So "endocrine glands" form hormones and release them into the blood or tissue. The opposite word is exocrine and means released "outside" of the body. An example of "exocrine" is sweat glands or saliva glands. When people say endocrine they usually mean "glands that make hormones".
Actions.
Hormones do many things. They regulate metabolism. Metabolism is all of the chemical and energy reactions that happen in a living thing. Hormones cause the growth and death of cells and of whole organisms. (Another word for a living thing like a plant or an animal is an "organism".) Hormones also start and control sexual development. For example, the hormones estrogen and progesterone make girls start puberty. Hormones help keep homeostasis in an organism. Homeostasis means to keep a constant state inside the body like temperature, amount of water and salts, and amount of sugar. Hormones released by one gland can also tell "other" glands to make "different" hormones.
Types of hormones.
There are four types of hormones in most animals. They are grouped by the chemicals from which they are made. When scientists say hormones are "derived from" it means they are "made from" something by changing it. These changes are chemical changes.
Regulation of hormones.
In biology regulation means to control something. So regulating hormones means controlling how much hormones are made and released from cells.
Negative feedback.
Hormone regulation is mostly done by "negative feedback".
In negative feedback a hormone makes an "effect". The cells that make the hormone see that "effect" happen. When they see it happen, they stop making more hormone.
A good example of "negative feedback" is the hormone insulin. Insulin is a hormone that is made by the pancreas. Insulin is released by the pancreas when you eat glucose (a kind of sugar). The glucose goes from your stomach to the blood. The amount of glucose in the blood goes up. The pancreas sees this high glucose level. It makes insulin and releases it into the blood. Then the insulin goes through the whole body and tells cells to take glucose out of the blood. Cells use some of this for energy. But some extra is also saved in the cells to use later. When cells take up glucose from the blood this makes the glucose level go down. The pancreas sees this and stops making insulin. When the pancreas stops sending this message (insulin), the cells in the body stop taking extra glucose out of the blood.
So the "negative feedback" works to keep the blood glucose level normal. If glucose is high, the pancreas makes insulin. The insulin causes the glucose to fall. Then this lower level of glucose tells the pancreas to stop making insulin.
There are two main types of hormones. One is seroid hormones. THey are nonpolar and need no receptor
Counter regulatory hormones.
Sometimes two or more hormones control the same thing. For example, blood glucose is very important to an organism. So it is not controlled by just one hormone. Other hormones also make the glucose level go up or down. If the glucose level gets "too low", the body releases hormones that do the "opposite" of insulin. They do not tell the cells in the body to take up glucose from the blood. They tell the cells to put glucose back into the blood. These kind of hormones that work opposite of other hormones are called "counter-regulatory hormones". Counter-regulatory hormones for insulin are glucagon and epinephrine.
Positive feedback.
Most important things in an organism are kept in homeostasis by "negative feedback" and "counter-regulatory hormones". However a few things are controlled in different ways. One rare way is "positive feedback". In negative feedback, the hormone's effect makes a gland stop making hormones. In positive feedback the opposite happens. The effect of the hormone tells the gland to make "even more" hormones.
An example of positive feedback is the hormone that causes "childbirth" (when babies are born.) The hormone that causes this is "oxytocin". This hormone is made by the pituitary gland. When the baby starts coming out, it stretches the muscle in the cervix (the bottom of the womb.) Nerves in the cervix send a message to the pituitary. This message makes the pituitary release more oxytocin. The oxytocin then causes the muscles of the womb to contract, or "squeeze". This causes "more" stretching in the cervix. This stretching then tells the pituitary to make "even more" oxytocin. So levels of oxytocin keep rising until the squeezing or "contractions" of the womb force the baby out. (The womb is also called the uterus.)
