Homosexuality is the sexual orientation for a person who is sexually and romantically attracted to people of their own gender. Men who are attracted to other men are called "gay" in slang. Women who are attracted to other women can be called "gay" as well, and they can also be called "lesbians". People who are attracted to men "and" women are called bisexual. Together homosexual, bisexual, and transgender people make up the "LGBT community." It is difficult to say how many people are homosexual. It all depends on the definition. Usually, studies place the number around 5-10% of the entire population. A study known as the Kinsey Reports, done in 1948, says that about 46% of men, and about 7% of women had sexually reacted to both sexes. Homosexuality is known to exist in all cultures and countries.
Definition.
One may say that homosexuality is the term used for people that feel romantically attracted to their own sex, but other definitions also exist. When one views homosexuality as the term for people that feel attracted to their own sex, more people are gay than when one might view homosexuality as only a term for people who do have sexual relationships with their own sex. Usually, the term is used to view all the people who are attracted to their own sex, also the people who didn't have a sexual relationship with their own sex (yet).
Nonetheless, the most visible form of homosexuality is the actual relationship. Most 'evidence' of homosexuality in ancient cultures comes from drawings of the men in an intimate relationship or sex, because it's the most obvious.
Some people also use the term "homophile" (from Greek "όμος" ("homos";meaning "the same") and "θιλειν" ("philein"; meaning "to love"). This term generally has a "softer" meaning. It usually is a term for people who are only attracted to their own sex, but do not, or are not able to have a gay relationship.
Other names.
There are many different words to describe homosexual people. Some of these are used to insult homosexual people. However, the LGBT community sometimes uses these words to describe themselves. This is done to make the words less hurtful. Some words to describe homosexual men are: gay, queer, fag, poof, faggot, fruit, and fairy. The first two are words many homosexual men say about themselves. The last four are more hurtful. Some words to describe homosexual women are lesbian, sappho, and dyke. Lesbian is used most often. Dyke is used less often and is sometimes used to describe lesbians who are more masculine (act or dress more like men.)
Homosexual "Pride".
When homosexual people do not tell people their sexual orientation, they are said to be "in the closet". "Out" or "out of the closet" is a slang term that means a homosexual person is open about his or her sexual orientation. This means he or she does not hide the fact that he or she is homosexual. Some gay and lesbian people stay in the closet because of fear of what would happen or because they live in a place that is not safe for homosexuals.
Sometimes people who are 'out' also say they are 'proud'. "Out" means they are not hiding their sexual orientation. "Proud" means that they are not ashamed of it. "Proud" or "Pride" has a special meaning in the LGBT community. It means they are celebrating and being happy that they are homosexual. It is not 'pride' meaning that they have done something to be proud of, but 'pride' meaning the opposite of shame. Many cities have "Pride Parades". These used to be protest marches. Today, they are usually celebrations of the LGBT community. They usually occur in June, in memory of the 'Stonewall Riots' that happened in New York City in 1969. These riots happened because police harassed and arrested people for being homosexual. 'Stonewall' or the 'Stonewall Riots' are sometimes called the start of the LGBT rights movement.
Causes.
The causes of homosexuality and bisexuality are controversial (people do not agree on them). Many religions see homosexual or bisexual behavior as sin. Some religious people also see homosexuality and bisexuality as a "choice" that a person makes.
However, many modern scientists believe that homosexuality is not a choice. The causes of homosexuality are not all understood, but genetics and the effects of prenatal hormones (when a baby is growing in its mother)and environment are sometimes thought to be causes. Scientists also claim to show that homosexuality happens not only in humans. Many other types of animals (like penguins, chimpanzees, and dolphins) often show homosexuality, some even for life-long periods as is the case with humans.
Many scientists and doctors also believe that sexual orientation cannot change. Doctors used to treat gay people as if they had mental illnesses. However, homosexuality is no longer called a disease by doctors in many countries. There are some religious groups who still try to 'cure' homosexuality. This is called 'reparative therapy.' There are homosexual individuals that have sought to re-orientate to heterosexual who have reported successful re-orientation and claim to find their experience beneficial e.g. as in the book You Don't Have to Be Gay by Jeff Konad and reports provided by the group Love In Action (available through their website).
Reparative Therapy is condemned by many medical and psychiatry groups like the American Psychological Association, American Psychiatric Association, Royal College of Psychiatrists, National Association of Social Workers, Royal College of Nursing, and the American Academy of Pediatrics. These groups believe sexual orientation cannot change. They also believe that gay people can be badly hurt by reparative therapy.
Many people believe that it is unfortunate to discuss causes of homosexuality and bisexuality without discussing causes of heterosexuality, too. Although it is easy to understand why heterosexuality exists (heterosexual sex produces babies), that does not directly explain how the brain develops to produce heterosexual people. Heterosexuality, homosexuality, and bisexuality all have causes, and some people believe that to discuss only the causes of homosexuality and bisexuality suggests that there is something wrong with people who have those orientations.
Relationships.
Like all people, gay people can fall in love and have life-long relationships. In most countries, they cannot legally marry their partners. However, they still have relationships in the same way as heterosexual people. They often call each other 'partners' or 'life-partners' instead of 'spouse', 'husband', or 'wife.' Instead of having a marriage ceremony, they may have a 'commitment ceremony.'
Some homosexual people have marriage ceremonies even though governments do not recognize or accept them. They may call their partner a spouse, wife, or husband despite the law.
But to them, the important part about marriage is not just the name. Married people get many benefits from being married. Depending on the country, these benefits can include paying less taxes, getting their spouse's insurance, inheriting property, social security benefits, having or adopting children together, emigrating to a spouse's country, being able to make choices for a sick spouse, or even being allowed to visit a sick spouse who is in a hospital.
Today there are five countries that allow homosexual people to marry: the Netherlands, Belgium, Spain, South Africa and Canada. The Netherlands was first in 2001. Canada and Spain were the most recent in 2005. Sometimes these are called 'Same-Sex Marriage' or 'Gay-Marriage'.
Instead of marriage, some countries or states offer homosexuals 'civil unions' or 'domestic partnerships.' This offers some of the protections and benefits of marriage, but not all. Civil unions and domestic partnerships are sometimes seen by the LGBT community as being 'second class' (not as good as 'first class'). They do offer "some" benefits for gay and lesbian couples, but they also suggest that these couples are not as important or valid as heterosexual couples. Some people even say this is like the "separate but equal" rules that were used to segregate people by race in the United States. They believe that separate is "never" equal and homosexuals should not accept being second class citizens.
Sex.
Homosexual sex, or gay sex is when people of the same gender have sexual relations with each other, whether they are two or more males, or two or more females.
Many religions say homosexual sex is a sin, including Islam, Christianity and Judaism. However, some denominations (different parts) of these religions, especially Christianity and Judaism now accept homosexuality.
Problems homosexuals face.
In modern times, homosexuality is more accepted in "western" countries. Most western countries have laws that protect homosexuals from violence and discrimination.
In many other countries, however, homosexuals are not safe from discrimination. A homosexual person can be fired from a job because he is gay - even if he is a good worker. Homosexuals also can be denied renting a home or even being able to eat in a restaurant because of their sexual orientation. In these countries, homosexuals can experience discrimination and violence. For example, Islamic law is used in some places to imprison (put in jail) and even execute (kill) homosexuals. In Iran, since 1979, some groups believe over 4,000 homosexuals have been executed because of their sexual orientation. In 2005, after fourteen months of prison and torture, two teenage boys were hung in Iran.
In the United Kingdom, homosexuality used to be a crime. Oscar Wilde, the famous Irish writer was imprisoned for it, and as a result, it destroyed his reputation and career as a wit and playwright. Alan Turing, the man who helped the Allies in World War II by breaking the Enigma Code used by the Germans, was convicted of this crime and ultimately killed himself over the effects.
Today in the United Kingdom, homosexuals are safer. Homosexual sex between adults is not a crime. Gay and lesbian couples cannot marry, but they can have "civil partnerships" that have some of the rights and benefits of marriage. Gay people can be in the military. So although the United Kingdom has changed many things, homosexuals still do not have full equal rights there.
In most of the world, homosexuals still do not have the same rights and freedoms that heterosexuals have.
Other websites.
There are national and international groups or organizations for the LGBT community. These organizations are often political. They fight for the rights and safety of homosexuals.
