A hippie (sometimes hippy) is a label for a person who feels attached to a certain counterculture that started in the United States and spread to other countries in the 1960s.
Hippies have their own views on drug use, sexual liberation, and women's rights.
History.
The first people to be called "hippies" in around 1965 were young adults and teenagers who grew out of the beatnik movement and supporters of civil rights for African-Americans in the Southern USA. They soon developed their own music scene in neighbourhoods in New York City (Greenwich Village) and San Francisco (Haight-Ashbury). They were also strongly against the Vietnam War, nuclear weapons, and what they called the "Establishment" and the "military-industrial complex" (This phrase was taken from a warning in the farewell speech of President Dwight Eisenhower in 1961).
Many more people began to see hippies in the news after the Human Be-In (January 1967) and the 1967 "Summer of Love" were held in San Francisco. By this time, they had developed their own lifestyle that included psychedelic styles, drug use, usually some amount of travel, and far longer hair than people had been used to seeing. These styles quickly spread across the country, especially to college campuses where students were loudly protesting President Lyndon Johnson's policies in Vietnam, the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in 1968, and other events. They also spread to the UK, Netherlands, France, Italy, Germany, Australia, New Zealand and Canada, among other places.
1968 was a time of excitement as many more Americans turned against the war following the Tet Offensive, King was shot, and politicians began to get ready for the election for President in November. Many colleges were shut down by students, and people burned their draft cards at public rallies. A group of radical hippies called the Yippies led by Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin led a huge protest during the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago, where they tried to run a pig called Pigasus as a candidate for President. The mayor responded by sending in riot police who beat people up in front of news cameras - even the cameramen, reporters, and other innocent people. This was shown on the news, and many programs and television stations began to become less favourable to the politicians, and more sympathetic to the hippies. This made hippie lifestyle much more mainstream through the early seventies.
In 1969, Richard Nixon succeeded Johnson as President, and protests continued - not just against the war, but against the court trials and hearings of the Yippie leaders who became known as "the Chicago Seven" (originally "Chicago Eight"). Also in that year, a huge rock concert was held in Bethel, New York - the three day Woodstock Festival, where around 500,000 hippies and music fans heard some of the most famous singers and groups of the time and indulged in wild, unrestrained behavior like nudism, nude swimming, mud-sliding, rain-dancing and mass tribal chants to show their freedom to the world.
Late that year, a sick murderer named Charles Manson who posed as a hippie killed several people, and because some people blamed hippies for this, the term began to fall a little out of fashion in 1970, even if the fashions themselves did not. A new type of hard rock called heavy metal was developing out of one style of hippie music, and a band called Led Zeppelin took the number one spot for most popular band of the year 1970, which had been held by the Beatles for eight years. Also that year, students at Kent State University in Ohio protesting Nixon's spread of bombing to Laos were shot at by the National Guard, and four were killed. This had a chilling effect on the hippies and the whole country, but the peace movement continued. In 1973, the draft was ended, and the war ended soon after that. US public attention turned to the Watergate scandal, and hippies never again had the attention they once did, though the lifestyle continued, especially in other countries. In the mid-seventies, trends like punks and disco were also spreading, causing the hippie image to fade in the media.
