Henry VI (December 6, 1421 - May 21, 1471) was King of England from 1422 to 1461 and then from 1470 to 1471. He was also the King of France from 1422 to 1453.
The Child King.
Henry was the only child of King Henry V of England and was his heir. He was born on December 6, 1421 at Windsor. He became king at the age of nine months on August 31, 1422, when his father died. His mother, Catherine of Valois was then only twenty years old. Because she was the daughter of King Charles VI of France she was not allowed to have a large part in raising her son.
Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, Henry IV's youngest son, was given the position of "Protector and Defender of the Realm and the Church" (Regent of England) until the King was old enough to rule. His job was to keep the peace and deal with Parliament. Henry IV's oldest living son, John, Duke of Bedford, was the made the Regent of France. He was in charge of running the war that was happening. Bedford also replaced Gloucester as Regent of England whenever he was in England.
Coronation.
Henry was eventually made King of England at Westminster Abbey on November 6, 1429 a month before his eighth birthday. He was made King of France at Notre Dame in Paris on December 16, 1431. He did not actually take control of government until he was of age in 1437 - the year his mother died.
Henry's marriage to Margaret of Anjou.
Because of his success in the Hundred Years' War, Henry V had left England with a lot of land in France. Since Henry VI was still a child, and England was ruled by a Regent, much of the land his father gained was lost. Diplomatic mistakes as well as military failures caused the loss of most of the English land in France.
Henry VI was a deeply spiritual man. He did not have the wisdom needed to rule effectively. He let his court be controlled by a few noble favorites. The people who wanted to end the war in France became more powerful, while the people supporting the war were ignored.
Henry VI was told that the best way of get peace with France was to marry Charles VII’s niece, Margaret of Anjou. Henry agreed to send people to talk with King Charles. Charles agreed to the marriage as long as he would not have to give the customary dowry and if he would get the lands of Maine and Anjou from the English. Henry V agreed, but did not let parliament know about giving away Maine and Anjou. The English people would not be happy to know the lands were given away.
The marriage happened in 1445. Margaret was much the opposite of Henry. She was ready to take decisions and lead while he was happy to be led by her. Margaret was a better ruler than Henry ever was, even though she was only sixteen at that time.
Death and legacy.
Henry VI was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he was murdered on May 21, 1471. Popular legend said that Richard, Duke of Gloucester was guilty of his murder, as well as the murder of Henry VI's son Edward of Westminster.
King Henry VI was originally buried in Chertsey Abbey. In 1485, his body was moved to St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.
He was succeeded by Edward IV, son of Richard, Duke of York.
