Homelessness refers to the condition of people who do not have a house or apartment to stay in. The term "homelessness" also includes people who sleep in homeless shelters, or in abandoned buildings, parking garages, or other places not meant for humans to live in.
Other names.
The term used to describe homeless people in academic articles and government reports is "homeless people". Popular slang terms include: vagrant, tramp, hobo (U.S.), transient, bum (U.S.), bagman/bagwoman, or the wandering poor.
Health care.
Health care for the homeless is a major public health challenge. Homeless people are more likely to suffer injuries and medical problems from their lifestyle on the street. Skin diseases and conditions abound, because homeless people are exposed to extreme cold in the winter and they have little access to bathing. Homeless people also have much more severe dental problems than the general population.
Developing and undeveloped countries.
The number of homeless people worldwide has grown steadily in recent years. In some Third World nations such as Brazil, India, Nigeria, and South Africa, homelessness is rampant, with millions of children living and working on the streets. Homelessness has become a problem in the cities of China, Thailand, Indonesia, and the Philippines.
History.
In the sixteenth century in England, the state first tried to give housing to vagrants instead of punishing them. In the eighteenth century, these were replaced by workhouses. These were later replaced by dormitory housing ("spikes"). By the 1930s in England, there were 30,000 people living in these facilities.
In most countries, many towns and cities had an area which contained the poor, transients, and afflicted, such as a "skid row".
In smaller towns, there were hobos, who temporarily lived near train tracks and hopped onto trains to various destinations.
Many places where people were once allowed freely to loiter, or purposefully be present, such as churches, public libraries and public atriums, became more strict as the homeless population grew larger.
In the 1980s, in the United States, some federal legislation was introduced for the homeless as a result of the work of Congressman Stewart B. McKinney. In 1987, the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act was enacted. Several organisations in some cities, such as New York and Boston, tried to be inventive about help to the swelling number of homeless people.
