Henry VIII (June 28, 1491 – January 28, 1547) was the King of England from 1509 until his death. He is best remembered for having had six wives.
Henry was born in Greenwich Palace on June 28, 1491 and was the second son of Henry VII of England and Elizabeth of York. He had one brother, who was called Arthur, Prince of Wales, and two sisters, who were called Margaret and Mary. Arthur should have been king after their father died, but Arthur died before his father, making Henry next in line for the throne. Henry ended up marrying Arthur's widow.
The most important event that happened in England when Henry was the king was the country's change in religion from Roman Catholic to Protestant. Because his first wife Catherine of Aragon had only had one daughter, and they did not have any sons to be his heirs, Henry asked the Pope to give them a divorce. The Pope did not want to do this, because he was afraid of what would happen next. Catherine's nephew was Charles V, Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, and he was very powerful. Also, Catherine's family ruled Spain, and Spain was the largest Catholic country. Henry then chose a new Archbishop of Canterbury, a man called Thomas Cranmer. Henry knew that Cranmer would do what he wanted, and Cranmer agreed that Henry could have a divorce from Catherine. The Pope was so angry that he excommunicated Henry, meaning Henry was thrown out of the church. Henry fought back. In 1534, he passed the Act of Supremacy, which meant that the king, not the pope, was the head of the church in England. He then forced all priests and bishops to accept him as the new leader. Anyone who refused was punished.
Protestants thought that monasteries, in which Roman Catholic monks and nuns lived, had more money and land than the monks and nuns needed. Henry forced the monks and nuns to move out of the monasteries. Then Henry gave the money and land of the monasteries to men who supported him. Most of the men who received money and land from the closed monasteries were Protestants. This event was called the Dissolution of the monasteries.
After his divorce from Catherine of Aragon, Henry VIII married Anne Boleyn, who was younger than Catherine and still able to have children. When Anne, just like Catherine, only had a daughter and no sons, Henry soon grew tired of her and started looking for another wife. Henry's most loyal official, Thomas Cromwell, helped him to find a way to get rid of Anne, by finding people who said that she had been the lover of several other men. Anne was put on trial and found guilty, and she was executed by having her head chopped off.
Henry's third wife was Jane Seymour. She soon gave birth to a son called Edward. This made Henry very happy, but, after a few days, Jane died. Henry had loved her very much and he never got over his sadness at her death. He lost interest in everything, and became very fat. He became angry with Thomas Cromwell when Cromwell suggested that he should get married again after Jane's death.
After a while, Henry changed his mind. Because he still only had one son, he realised that it might be a good idea to marry again, and he agreed to marry Anne of Cleves, a German princess. When Anne arrived, Henry did not think she was as pretty as she looked in the pictures he had seen, and he was not satisfied with her. Anne was also unhappy, and agreed to be divorced from Henry after only a few months. In the meantime, Henry had noticed a young lady at court, called Catherine Howard, and thought that she might make a good wife. Catherine Howard was a cousin of Henry's second wife, Anne Boleyn. Henry and Catherine got married in 1540, but Catherine was much younger than Henry and she soon got tired of him and started to flirt with other men. After they had been married for just over a year, Henry found out that Catherine had been having an affair with someone else. She was found guilty of treason and was executed, just like Anne Boleyn had been a few years before.
Henry's sixth and last wife was called Catherine Parr. She was a woman in her thirties who had already been married twice. Her first two husbands had been much older than her, and both had died. Henry thought that she would be more sensible and faithful than his previous wives, and he turned out to be right. Catherine Parr stayed married to Henry for over three years, until he died, but they did not have any children.
Henry died on 28 January 1547. He was buried in Windsor Castle. Henry was the father of two queens and one king. They were Mary I of England, Elizabeth I of England and Edward VI of England. None of them had any children of their own.
