Henry II of England (March 5, 1133 – July 6, 1189) was the son of Geoffrey of Anjou and Empress Matilda. He married Eleanor of Aquitaine in 1152 and was crowned king in 1154. His children included Richard, who would later lead many battles, and John, who would later be the worst king in English history. Although he was the king of England, he never learnt the English language because his family had come over from France in 1066. He died in 1189 aged 56. He ruled for 35 years and descended the throne to his eldest son, Richard.
Henry II's succession to the English throne was agreed in 1153. He finally came to the throne in 1154 upon Stephen I's death. He reduced the power of the barons who had become very powerful in Stephen's reign, and in 1166 introduced trial by jury.
One of the big events that happened while Henry ruled was the killing of Thomas Becket, the Archbishop of Canterbury. Henry II did not like Becket because Becket was trying to increase the power of church courts that had lost power when Henry had made major changes to the legal system. Four knights killed Becket in Canterbury Cathedral. Legend say that the knights had heard Henry say, "Who will rid me of this turbulent (rebellious) priest?" It is more likely that they did it because of the fact that Henry had shown over the last several years that he did not like Becket.
Henry's first son, William, Count of Poitiers, died in as a baby. In 1170, Henry and Eleanor's fifteen-year-old son, Henry, was crowned king (another reason for Henry's arguing with Thomas Becket, who did not agree with the Henry being crowned). Young Henry never ruled and is not in the list of the kings and queens of England; he became known as Henry the Young King so he was not confused with his nephew Henry III of England.
Henry and his wife, Eleanor of Aquitaine, had five sons and three daughters: William, Henry, Richard, Geoffrey, John, Matilda, Eleanor, and Joan. Henry tried to take Eleanor's lands from her (and from their son Richard). This led to conflict between Henry on the one side and his wife and sons on the other.
Henry also had many children outside of his marriage, including William de Longespee, Earl of Salisbury, whose mother was Ida, Countess of Norfolk; Geoffrey, Archbishop of York, son of a woman named Ykenai; Morgan, Bishop of Durham; and Matilda, Abbess of Barking.
Upon Henry's death his son Richard became king.
