Hail Mary is a Christian prayer to Mary, the mother of Jesus. Most of the text comes from the Gospel of Luke, though there were some additions in the 13th century. In the prayer, the person praying asks Mary to step between themselves, and God and to put in a good word for them.
The Hail Mary is used within Roman Catholicism as the basis of the Rosary. The prayer is also used by the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox as well as by many other groups within the Catholic tradition of Christianity including Anglicans, Independent Catholics, and Old Catholics. Some Protestant denominations also make use of the prayer.
Hail Mary in the Bible.
The prayer uses two passages from Saint Luke's Gospel: "Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst women" () and "Blessed art thou amongst women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb" ()
In mid-thirteenth-century Western Europe the prayer consisted only of these words with the single addition of the name "Mary" after the word "Hail". This is evident from the commentary of Saint Thomas Aquinas on the prayer.
The first of the two passages from Saint Luke's Gospel is the greeting of the Angel Gabriel to Mary, originally written in Koine Greek. The opening word of greeting, "chaíre", here translated "Hail", literally has the meaning "Rejoice", "Be glad". This was the normal greeting in the language in which Saint Luke's Gospel is written and is still used in the same sense in Modern Greek. FOr this reason, both "Hail" and "Rejoice" are valid English translations of the word.
The word, ("kecharitōménē"), here translated as "full of grace", allows foe various translations. Grammatically, the word is the feminine present perfect passive voice participle of the verb, "charitóō", which means "to show, or bestow with, grace" and, in the passive voice, "to have grace shown, or bestowed upon, one". The form of the verb is intensive, thereofre the translations "full of grace".
The text also appears in the account of the annunciation contained in the apocryphal Infancy Gospel of Matthew, in chapter 9.
The prayer in Eastern (Greek) tradition.
To the Biblical texts this adds the opening invocation "Theotokos Virgin," the name "Mary" and the concluding "for you have borne the Saviour of our souls".
The prayer in Western (Latin) tradition.
The article on Hail Mary in the Catholic Encyclopedia says that the Hail Mary was not used in this form before about 1050. Nevertheless, a later story attributes the current Hail Mary to Ildephonsus of Toledo who lived in the 7th century. According to the story, he used the angel's greeting only, without the later addition.
Saint Thomas Aquinas spoke of the name "Mary", indicating who was the "full of grace" person addressed, as the only word that had been added in the West even by the mid-thirteenth century to the Biblical verses of which the prayer was composed. But at about the same time the name "Jesus" was also added, to specify who was meant by the phrase "the fruit of thy womb".
For this reason, the Western version of the prayer is not derived from the Greek version: even the earliest Western forms have no trace of the phrases "Mother of God and Virgin" and "for thou hast given birth to the Saviour of our souls", which are part of the Greek version.
Eleven years later, the sentence was included in the Catechism of the Council of Trent of 1566. The "Catechism of the Council of Trent" says that to the first part of the Hail Mary, by which "we render to God the highest praise and return Him most gracious thanks, because He has bestowed all His heavenly gifts on the most holy Virgin... the Church of God has wisely added prayers and an invocation addressed to the most holy Mother of God... we should earnestly implore her help and assistance; for that she possesses exalted merits with God, and that she is most desirous to assist us by her prayers, no one can doubt without impiety and wickedness."
For translations from the Latin into various languages, see
The prayer in Syriac Orthodox tradition.
The Syriac Orthodox Church uses a version of the Hail Mary much closer to the current Western form than to the Greek version.
Usage in the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches.
In the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches, the prayer is very common in the Greek form indicated above, or in translations from it. Although it is not said quite as often as in the West, it is well known, oft-used, and appears in several canons of prayer. It is typically sung thrice at the end of Vespers during an All-Night Vigil, as well as occurring many times in the course of daily prayer.
Variant Slavonic versions.
The first is the older, and remains in use by the Old Believers as well as those who follow the Ruthenian recension (among them the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church and the Ruthenian Catholic Church). The second appeared in 1656 under the liturgical reforms of Patriarch Nikon of Moscow, and is in use by the Russian Orthodox Church, the Serbian Orthodox Church, the Bulgarian Orthodox Church and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church).
Usage in the Roman Catholic Church.
The Hail Mary is the essential element of the Rosary, a prayer method in use especially among Latin Rite (Western) Catholics, and that appears in the East only among Latinised Ukrainian and Maronite Catholics. It consists of four sets of five Mysteries. These meditate upon events of Jesus' life during his childhood (Joyful Mysteries), public ministry (Luminous Mysteries), Passion (Sorrowful Mysteries), and from his Resurrection onwards (Glorious Mysteries). Each of these Mysteries is prayed as a decade (a unit of ten), consisting of one Our Father ("Pater Noster" or "The Lord's Prayer"), ten Hail Marys, and one 'Glory Be' ("Gloria Patri") (Doxology).
The Hail Mary is also the central part of the Angelus, a devotion generally recited thrice daily by many Catholics, as well as some Anglicans and Lutherans.
Anglican use of the Hail Mary.
Anglo-Catholics also employ the Hail Mary in devotional practice. Traditional Anglo-Catholics use the prayer in much the same way as the Roman Catholics, including use of the Rosary and the recitation of the Angelus. Many Anglican churches contain statues of the Virgin Mary, and the faithful use devotional prayers including the Hail Mary. However there might be some variations in local usage, reflecting the differing theological leanings of the two bodies.
Musical settings.
Many people have written music for the Hail Mary, or Ave Maria. Among the most famous settings is the version by Charles Gounod (1859), adding melody and words to Johann Sebastian Bach's first prelude from the Well-Tempered Clavier. 345;ák's version was composed in 1877. Another setting of Ave Maria was written by Giuseppe Verdi for his 1887 opera "Otello". Russian composer César Cui, who was raised Roman Catholic, set the text at least three times: as the "Ave Maria," op. 34, for 1 or 2 women's voices with piano or harmonium (1886), and as part of two of his operas: "Le Flibustier" (premiered 1894) and "Mateo Falcone" (1907). Settings also exist by Mozart, Byrd, Elgar, Verdi, Saint-Saens, Rossini, Brahms and Perosi as well as numerous versions by less well-known composers, such as J.B. Tresch.
In Slavonic, the text was also a popular subject for setting to music by Eastern European composers. These include Rachmaninov, Stravinsky, Bortniansky and several others.
Franz Schubert's "Ellens dritter Gesang" (D839, Op 52 no 6, 1825) is often misidentified as "Schubert's "Ave Maria" because it opens with the greeting "Ave Maria" ("Hail Mary"), even though it is not a setting of the traditional Ave Maria prayer. The original text of Schubert's song is from Sir Walter Scott's "The Lady of the Lake" and was translated into German by Adam Storck. Adding to the confusion, the traditional Ave Maria prayer is often sung to Schubert's melody of "Ellens dritter Gesang"; and in Walt Disney's "Fantasia", the tune is used with yet another text beginning with the phrase.
