HMS Sirius was the main ship of the First Fleet. The First Fleet carried the convicts and soldiers to Australia to start a penal colony. This was the start of European settlement in Australia.
Description.
The ship of 520 tons was built on the River Thames, England in 1781. She was first called "HMS Berwick.". She had been used as a store ship and then laid up until 1786. She was put back into service for the trip to Australia, and renamed "HMS Sirius". She was armed with 6 carronades, short cannons used to fire large objects to smash ships. She also had 4 6-pounder guns. There were another 10 6-pounder guns in the cargo hold to be used to protect the new settlement. HMS Sirius was about long and wide. Her hold was about deep.
The crew.
The ship was commanded by Arthur Phillip with John Hunter as second captain. The ship had 2 captains, Phillip would be in charge of the ship as part of the First Fleet, and then Hunter would be in charge after while Phillip was setting up the penal colony. Philip Gidley King was lieutenant with William Bradley and George William Maxwell. She carried a crew of about 160 men.
With the First Fleet.
"HMS Sirius" carried all the guns and ammunition for the Fleet. No weapons were kept on the convict transports in case of mutiny. She left England on May 13, 1787, and sailed to Australia with stops at Santa Cruz, Rio de Janeiro and Cape Town. She arrived in Botany Bay on January 20, 1788. She reached Port Jackson on January 26.
At Cape Town 8 guns were taken away from the gun deck and put in the hold. This was to make room to build stalls to hold cattle. The guns were put back after the ship arrived in Sydney. They were taken out again and put into a fort at Dawes Point.
Helping the new colony.
In October 1788 "HMS Sirius" sailed east to Cape Town to get extra food supplies. Leaving Cape Town in January 1789, she continued to travel east until she got back to Sydney in May. This eastward journey using the west winds, known as "the Roaring Forties" meant that the ship had sailed completely around the world. Rough seas near Tasmania smashed her figurehead and badly damaged the front of the ship.
In March 1790 the "Sirius" went to Norfolk Island to deliver more marines (soldiers), convicts and supplies. She was able to unload the people, but bad weather made getting the supplies ashore impossible. Four days later Captain Hunter tried to land the supplies in Sydney Bay. The ship drifted too far into the bay and was wrecked on a reef on March 19. All the crew were rescued. Over the next two week most of the supplies were saved as well.
It was another 11 months before another ship came to Norfolk Island and took the crew back to Sydney. Hunter went back to England and an inquiry decided that the shipwreck was not his fault.
Anchor and cannon.
One of "HMS Sirius's" 12 anchors was found at the wreck site. In 1907 it was put on display in Macquarie Place, Sydney. The anchor is in good condition although the ends of the arms were broken off while it was being recovered from the wreck. Work was done on the anchor to help preserve it in 1992. The size of the anchor is long, wide and deep. Beside the anchor is one of the cannons from the "HMS Sirius". This was one of the cannons brought ashore to protect Sydney back in 1788.
In 1983 the wreck was explored by archaeologists. In 1985 several items were found including a carronade and another anchor. In 1987 more than 600 items were brought up from the ship. These are on display in the Maritime Museum on Norfolk Island.
