The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (or IEEE for short) an international non-profit, professional organization for the advancement of technology related to electricity. It has the most members of any technical professional organization in the world, with more than 365,000 members in around 150 countries.
It was formed in 1963 by the merger of the Institute of Radio Engineers (IRE, founded 1912) and the American Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE, founded 1884).
The IRE concerned mostly radio engineering. The major interests of the AIEE were wire communications and light and power systems. As technology developing, the IRE and the AIEE became difficult to distinguish. And people who belong to both group were increasing gradually. After World War II, the leadership of both the IRE and the AIEE merged two organizations on January 1, 1963.
IEEE says purpose of their organization "scientific and educational, directed toward the advancement of the theory and practice of electrical, electronics, communications and computer engineering, as well as computer science, the allied branches of engineering and the related arts and sciences." In pursuing these goals, the IEEE serves a major publisher of scientific journals, provides learning opportunities within the engineering sciences, research, and technology and so on.
IEEE consists of 150 countrys, 350,000 members, 39 societies, organized around specialized technical fields, with more than 300 local organizations that hold regular meetings. Famous presidents of IEEE and its founding organizations include Elihu Thomson, Alexander Graham Bell, Ernst Weber. The current (2008) president of IEEE is Lewis M. Terman.
IEEE produces 30 percent of the world's literature in the electrical and electronics engineering and computer science fields, publishing well over 100 peer-reviewed journals.
The content in these journals as well as the content from several hundred annual conferences are available in the IEEE's online digital library.
