Incest is a term that refers to sex between people who are closely related. In many societies, such relationships are taboo, or forbidden by law. This is because children that result from such relationships are more likely to have birth defects.
The closeness that is forbidden varies in societies; some only consider it to be the same lineage (like parents, and their children; or brothers and sisters that have both parents in common). That way, relationships between cousins are possible, since a cousin is the child, of the siblings of one of the parents. Those who live in the same household, or those who belong to the same clan or lineage are affected. Other societies consider it to include "blood relatives"; still others also include those related by adoption or marriage.
The type of incest most often reported is father-daughter incest.
Incest between adults and children is a form of child sexual abuse. This form has been shown to cause one of the worst forms of childhood trauma, a trauma that often causes serious and long-term psychological damage, especially in the case of parental incest.
It is difficult to say how frequent incest is, but researchers have estimated that between 10% and 15% of people have at least one incest experience. Less than 2% of these involve intercourse or attempted intercourse. Among women, research by Russell (1986) and Wyatt (1985) has given estimates as high as twenty percent.
Incest between consenting adults is is very rare.
Consensual incest between adults is a crime in most countries, although it is seen by some as a victimless crime.
Most societies have some form of incest avoidance. The incest taboo is and has been one of the most common of all cultural taboos, both in current nations and many past societies, with legal penalties imposed in some jurisdictions. Most modern societies have legal or social restrictions on closely consanguineous marriages. However, in some societies, such as that of Ancient Egypt, brother–sister, father–daughter, and mother–son relations were practiced among royalty. In addition, the Balinese and some Inuit tribes have altogether different beliefs about what constitutes illegal and immoral incest.
