"Iron Man" is a superhero movie based on the fictional Marvel Comics character "Iron Man". It was released in various countries from April 30, 2008 to May 2 2008. The movie is about Tony Stark (Robert Downey Jr.), a billionaire industrialist who is captured by terrorists in Afghanistan. The movie received very good reviews, and as of May 5 holds a 94% positive rating on Rotten Tomatoes. It was the number one movie in America in its opening weekend.
Plot.
Tony Stark (Downey) is a very rich and smart man who is the leader of Stark Industries, a company that makes weapons and bombs. He gives a demo in Afghanistan for the United States Army to show off his new weapon. He and four other soldiers get into a humvee and drive off. During the ride, the humvee is attacked by some Afghanistan people. All of the soldiers are killed and Stark is kidnapped.
Stark wakes up in a cave to find a man named Yinsen standing over him. Yinsen took as much shrapnel out as he could and installed wires connected to a battery to prevent the rest of the shrapnel from reaching his heart and killing him. The leader, a man named Raza, orders Stark and Yinsen to build a missile for him. Stark builds an arc reactor, which is a very small thing that produces clean power. It replaces the battery and its wires.
He and Yinsen then build an armored suit for Stark to escape. In the final moments, Stark goes off-screen (Raza and his men are watching on video cameras) to load the suit up. When the suit takes too much time, Yinsen picks up an assault rifle and starts shooting to give Stark more time. The suit loads and Stark easily defeats Raza and his men. He then sees Yinsen one last time, who is fatally wounded and dies minutes later. Stark sets fire to the whole camp and lifts off using the armored suit. He crashes and the Army finds him.
At home, Stark announces that he is closing the weapons division of Stark Industries. He then spends all of his time downstairs building a new armored suit. He also builds a new arc reactor that is more powerful than the last one. Stark tells his secretary, Pepper Potts (Paltrow), to destroy the old one, but she instead puts it in a glass box. On the first test of his second armor (called the Mark II armor), Stark goes up into the atmosphere and the suit freezes up. He rebuilds it to withstand the cold temperature and paints it red (this one is called Mark III).
At a party, he learns that other people, like Obadiah Stane (Bridges) (the second-in-command at Stark Industries) are secretly selling weapons to Raza and his men. He tells Potts to go into Stane's office and find the shipping records so he can fly to the places and destroy the weapons. Stone finds out that Potts got the data and goes to Stark's house, where he takes Stark's second arc reactor and leaves. Stark starts to fall down as he tries to get back to his workshop to find the original arc reactor. He shatters the glass box and installs it and then suits up to fight.
Potts and a bunch of government men enter the Stark Industries location to arrest Stane. Earlier in the movie, Stane had gone to Afghanistan. Raza and his men found the first Iron Man armor and gave it to Stane. Stane uses the armor to build a bigger suit that is known as Iron Monger. Stark and Stane then battle. At the end, Stark has Potts blow up the large arc reactor at Stark INdustries in order to beat Stane.
In the next few days, the press has dubbed Stark's armor "Iron Man". A government agency called S.H.I.E.L.D gives him a cover story that he was on a boat during the events. However, during the press conference, Stark doesn't use the story and says that he is Iron Man. After the credits roll, a man named Nick Fury tells Stark that he is not the only superhero around and that he would like to discuss the Avengers Initiative with him.
Sequel.
Because this movie did so well, Marvel plans to make a new one. It will be called "Iron Man 2" and will be released in April 2010.
