The Irish Republican Army or IRA originated from the Irish Republican Brotherhood, and fought against the British army to get freedom for Ireland in the Irish War of Independence. When the island of Ireland was split up and the Republic of Ireland became independent, the IRA split up and some parts of it were involved in the fighting in Northern Ireland called 'The Troubles'.
The original IRA.
The Irish Republican Army (Irish: Óglaigh na hÉireann) was formed from the merger of a part of the Irish Volunteers with the union's Irish Citizens Army militia after the Easter Uprising of 1916, and the military is part of the Irish independence movement.
After the unilateral declaration of independence by the Irish Parliament 1919, the IRA until 1921 war against the British occupation (Anglo-Irish War). 1921 led to the Anglo-Irish Treaty, which established the division of Ireland. The IRA and the then ruling party Sinn Féin each split on the question of whether to approve the treaty or not. The contract opponents remained in the IRA, which subsequently resulted in both parts of Ireland was banned. The Irish Prime Minister Arthur Griffith relies on pressure from the British, 28 In June 1922 the first armed force against the IRA. In a bitter civil war fought both sides, until the IRA in May 1923 capitulated.
The further history of the IRA was armed by the two movements: on the one hand, a leftist movement, the anti-IRA at a rate set wanted, on the other hand, often as a traditional or designated militaristic flow, which is essentially a non-political expression. With a series of bombing campaigns in Northern Ireland and Britain tried this trend, the government of Great Britain to withdraw from Northern Ireland to move.
The Troubles.
The leftist group recorded in the 30s some success in the experiment, the division between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland to overcome. With the Republican Congress, she made 1934 a great attempt, the IRA into an anti-fascist National Front involved. The refusal of IRA-Leadership, to cooperate with this course, led to a further division. Frank Ryan led a part of the Congress-group after Spain, where they are in the Spanish Civil War against Franco fought.
The brutal police action against the Northern Ireland civil rights movement and the raids loyalistischer paramilitaries called 1967 the IRA back on the map. At that time and until the end of the 80s were Northern Irish Catholics were in a legal vacuum, and were de facto vulnerable to the whims of the official from Britain supported nordirisch-protestantischen police forces and paramilitary groups. Open violence to murders, torture, open prosecution, defamation and exclusion of qualified training and public offices were years of normalcy for the Northern Irish Catholics. The already totgesagte IRA obtained under these conditions, the support of large parts of the Catholic population, and almost had the status of a "protecting power".
In the 60s, there were differences between the military and the Provisionals oriented rather marxistisch-theoretisch oriented Officials. This resulted 1969 to re-divide into Provisional Irish Republican Army PIRA and the "official" group OIRA, which is strong in the civil rights movement-oriented. The "official" wing of the IRA never formally dissolved, but is de facto since about 1980 is no longer relevant.
In the 80 years changed the leadership of the Provisional IRA, instead of the veterans from the south over younger zactivists from Northern Ireland to key positions. At the top of the Sinn Féin joined Gerry Adams, the party clearly to the left. In 1993 he initiated jointly with the Social Democrats John Hume to the peace process, in August 1994, the IRA a unilateral ceasefire, a prerequisite for the Good Friday Agreement created. Despite the ceasefire, the IRA remained active even though not fighting.
Only two small splinter groups held up at the last state of war: The Real IRA and the Continuity IRA. When a car bomb attack the splinter group, which is called "Real IRA", in August 1998, in Northern Ireland Omagh were a total of 29 people killed.
On 28 In July 2005, the end of the IRA's armed warfare. "All IRA-Soldiers have been instructed to lay down their arms," reads a statement from the IRA days, and continued: "We believe that there is now an alternative way, (…) the British rule in our country to an end. "On 26 September 2005, the complete disarmament of the IRA by the head of the international disarmament commission, Canadian General John de Chastelain, announced. The Commission also belonged to the Protestant pastor Harold Good.
From the radical Protestant leader Reverend Ian Paisley, the lack of transparency in the disarmament criticized because it agreed neither photographs nor information on the extent of the arsenal delivered.
On 29 In October 2005 spoke of the sense Féin-Leadership Gerry Adams first time that the war of the IRA "clearly come to an end". This corresponds to a phrase used by British Unionists for years was asked, if the IRA and its fight the speech.
