Independencia (English: "Independence") is a Dominican province, located in the western part of the country, on the border with Haiti. Its capital city is Jimaní.
It was created on 29 December 1948 but to start on 1 January 1950. It was part of the Bahoruco province before being elevated to the category of province. Its name remembers the national independence from Haiti on 27 February 1844.
Location.
Independencia is bordered to the north by the Elías Piña and Bahoruco provinces, to the east by Barahona and to the south by the Pedernales province. To the west Independencia borders the Republic of Haiti.
Municipalities.
Independencia has a total area of 2,006.44 km². It has 4.1% of the area of the Dominican Republic and it is ranked as the 8th (out of 31 plus the National District) largest province.
There are six municipalities and six municipal districts in the province.
Population.
In 2002 (last national census), there were 50,833 people living in the Independencia province, and 31,729 (62.42%) living in towns and cities. The population density was 25.3 persons/km², the second lowest in the country; only Pedernales has a lower population density.
The largest city is Duvergé, with a population (in 2002) of 17,320 inhabitants. It is the only province in the Dominican Republic where the capital city is not the largest city of the province; Jimaní has a population of 11,414.
Geography.
The Sierra de Bahoruco is found in the southern part of the province, and the Sierra de Neiba runs across the northwestern part of the province, on the border with the Elías Piña province. The rest of the province is part of the "Hoya de Enriquillo" (or "Neiba Valley"). In this valley is the "Lake Enriquillo", and about half of its area is part of the Independencia province.
There are few permanent rivers, with water all the time. The longest river is the Las Damas river (24 km), which flows from Sierra de Bahoruco to the Lake Enriquillo.
The climate of the province is a tropical climate, very hot and dry in the valley, but it is cooler on the mountains.
Economy.
As in all border provinces in the Dominican Republic, there is little economic development. The trade with Haiti is important in Jimaní, which is not far from Port-au-Prince. On the Sierra de Neiba, coffee and beans are important products.
