The "Igreja Pentecostal e Apostolica Missão Jesus" is a pentecostal church committed to the defence of the socially deprived. It is seated in the city of São Paulo, Brazil.
Goals.
"Igreja Pentecostal e Apostolica Missão Jesus" is focused on human rights in Brazil - a country well know for its constant violations of human rights and assassination of Human Rights Defenders in past years.
Brazil is a country where human rights are not accepted by authorities, and on several occasions the church's members faced harassment from local authorities, culminating in the illegal arrest of four volunteers of "Pastoral dos Direitos Humanos" of church, among then a lawyer, Mr Antonio Fernandez Saenz, a journalist, Ms. Dirce Ramiro de Andrade, as well as two evangelical ministers, Jose Fernandez Saenz and Manuel Fernando Fernandez Saenz, on September 2005, by "Polícia Militar do Estado de São Paulo".
History.
It was founded in September 11, 2001. As soon as the September 11, 2001 attacks took place, the founders of the church decided to include in the by-laws of church the fight against all forms of evil as a main goal.
Motto.
The church's motto is "God's in his Heaven, All's right with the world". These words were taken from a poem by Robert Browning
The Church also supports Soldados de Cristo - Christ´s Soldiers, a group of missionaries working on "hot spots" on Africa, Asia and Brazil.
Incident of police harrassement against a lawyer.
"In September, military police raided the offices of Antonio Fernandez Saenz, a lawyer working with the socially deprived inhabitants of São Bernardo do Campo, south of São Paulo. The officers allegedly did not present a search warrant and took several documents containing statements by local residents accusing civil and military police of torture, extortion and sexually assaulting children. When Antonio Fernandez Saenz tried to report the incident to the civil police, he was threatened and intimidated. According to reports, he continued to receive anonymous death threats."
Human rights activists threatened.
"A number of domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without government restriction, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Federal officials usually were cooperative and responsive to their views. Although federal and state officials in many cases sought the aid and cooperation of NGOs in addressing human rights problems, human rights monitors occasionally were threatened and harassed for their efforts to identify and take action against human rights abusers, particularly members of the state police forces. On September 21, AI reported death threats against Antonio Fernandez Saenz, a lawyer who provided legal assistance to socially deprived inhabitants of Sao Bernardo do Campo, São Paulo State. According to AI, military police threatened Saenz and his family and also broke into his office and stole documents which allegedly incriminated civil and military police in human rights violations."
After this facts in September 2005, files and staff allocated to human rights were re-allocated to a new place, in order to avoid death threats and a new theft of documents.
