Jak 3 is a video game made by Naughty Dog. It is the third game in the Jak and Daxter series.
Story.
Jak, Daxter, and Pecker are thrown into the desert by their own people one year after the previous game, Jak 2, ended.
They are found by Damas, Kleiver, and another wastelander. Jak is tested in an arena, and wins a fight, proving him worthy to not be killed. He and Daxter then explore, meeting Seem, a monk and Errol.
Friends who miss him.
Further throughout the game, Ashelin (a key character in Jak 2), asks Jak to come back to Haven City. Jak refuses, telling her "they could rot for all I care", still angry for them throwing him and Daxter for the wrong reason.
New powers.
Later on, he decides to go back, and meets everybody once again. He gains new light powers that give him the ability to fly, make a shield around him, slow time, and heal himself. With his newfound powers he saves Haven City and Spargus City from attacks multiple times.
The final fight.
In the end, Jak finds out that Damas was his father, and Veger took him away from him. Jak chases Veger towards the catacombs, and meets the Precursors themselves. It is also realized that Daxter is also a Precursor. Jak and Daxter is sent to Errol to stop him. When he is defeated, Jak, Daxter, and all the others gathered together in the arena, while the Precursors make their speech. Jak and Daxter have saved the world!
Characters.
Jak: He is the main character of the game series. He is accompanied with Daxter.
Daxter: Jak's sidekick. He sits on Jak's shoulder while they go on adventures. He is hyperactive and "immature", which brings laughter into the game. He is playable in this game.
Ashelin: She was once part of the Krimzon Guard, but then turned to the other side after she realized what her father was up to. She is now head leader of Haven City.
Samos: He is also the controller of Green eco. He is Jak and Daxter's "mentor". In Jak 2, he was The Shadow, leader of The Underground, which was a movement against Baron Praxis.
Keira: She helps with Jak's missions, and also is his love interest, Jak is also her love interest.
Torn:He was part of the Underground. He and Ashelin usually work together. He befriended Jak the hard way in "Jak 2", but he still isn't friends with Daxter.
Damas: Jak's father. He was the king of Spargus City, and before that, the leader of Haven City. He dies after a truck is overturned right above his body.
