John Vane was an Australian bushranger who became a member of Ben Hall's gang. He was one of the few members of the gang to die of old age, and not to be killed.
Early life.
John Vane was born at Jerry Plains in New South Wales in 1842. His grandparents had come to Australia as convicts but his parents were seen as respectable and wealthy. They lived at a place called Number One, which was about 11 miles from Carcoar. He was described in 1863 as being about 6 feet tall, with dark hair and a ruddy (red) face.. He worked as a stockman, looking after cattle and was said to be an excellent horse rider.
Bushranger.
Vane said that he became a bushranger because the police said he had robbed a hotel. The hotel was at Long Swamp and owned by a man named Boyce. It was robbed on February 12, 1863. Vane's brother, William Vane, with James Burke and George Cheshire had already been charged with the robbery. The police let them go when no one was able to identify them as the robbers. Vane said he was scared of the police and went into the bush to hide. He met with John Gilbert and O'Meally, who were members of Ben Hall's gang. For sveral months Vane was a member of the the Ben Hall gang.
On October 24, 1863, the Ben Hall gang went to the house of Gold Commissioner Keightley at Dunn's Plains. There was a big gun battle before the bushrangers were able to capture the house. Micky Burke was shot dead by Keightley during the battle. Vane wanted to kill Keightley for shooting his friend, but Ben Hall would not let him do it. Instead they said that wanted 500 pounds or they would shoot him. Keightley's wife rode to Bathurst that night to get the money. The story of the ride was later turned into a stage play.
Surrender.
In November 1863 a priest, the Reverend M'Carthy met Vane by chance in the bush. He later met the bushranger's mother. They talked Vane into giving himself up. He went with the priest to the Bathurst courthouse, made several statements and was then put into Bathurst gaol to wait for a trial.
Later life.
Vane continued to be in trouble with the police. In 1880 the newspapers reported that John Vane, ex-bushranger, was in court at Bathurst, for stealing 431 sheep. A friend, Terence M'Cann who had helped steal the sheep, was the main witness. Another man, Thomas Parker, tried to stop M'Cann from giving evidence. He was put in gaol for 12 months.
John Vane died in Cowra, New South Wales on January 30, 1906.
