John Wesley (1703, Epworth, England-1791) was one of the founders of the Methodist church. Anglikanish minister and christian theologian who was an early leader in the Methodist movement. Methodism had three rises: the first at Oxford University with the founding of the "Holy Club" the second while Wesley was priest in Savannah, Georgia; and the third in London after Wesley's return to England.Throughout his life, Wesley remained within the Church of England, and insisted that his movement was well within yet bounds of the Anglican Church.
Early life.
John Wesley was born in Epworth, England 23 miles (37km) north west of Lincoln., the son of Samuel Wesley, a graduate of Oxford, and minister of the Church of England. At the age of five, John was rescued from the burning rectory. This escape made deep impression on his mind, and he regarded himself as proventially set apart, as a "brand plucked from burning". In 1869 Samuel married Susanna Annesley. Both Samuel and Susanna had been raised in Disseling.
In 1696 Samuel Welsey was appointed rector of Epworth, where John, the fifteenth child, was born. The Wesley children's early education was given by their parents in the Epworth rector. Each child including the girls, was taught to read as they can could walk, and talk. John was admitted to Charterhouse school, London, when he lived the stations methodical and (for a while) religious life in which he had been trained at here. During his early youth, John Wesley had an a deep religious experience. His biographer, Tyerman, says that he went to charterhouse a saint, but he became negelient of religious duties and left a sinner.
Oxford and Georgia.
In june 1720, Weskley entered Christ church, Oxford, with an annual allowance of 40 pound as charterhouse scholar. His health was poor and it hard to keep out of debt.A scheme of study which he drew up for 1721 with a time-table for each day of the week is still to be seen in his earlist diary. This first diary thus from April 15. 1725, to february 12, 1727. A Friend describes Wesley at this god humor. He was reading of William Law's Christian Perfektion and Serious call gave him, he said, I note sublience view of the law God: and he resoled to keep it, inwardly and outwardly, as sacre´dly as possible.
Personality and activities.
Wesley travelled constantly, generally on horseback, examined and comissioned preachers, administeriet aid charities, prescriped for the sick, helped to pioneer the use of electric shock for the treatment off ilness.
Beginning of Revival.
His Aldergate Street London 1n 1738, in which he heard a reading of luther's preface to Epistle to the Romans, and penned the new famous lines"I felt my heart strangely warmed", revolutionuzed the character and method of his ministry
