Johnny Depp (born June 9, 1963 in Owensboro, Kentucky) is an American actor.
He was the son of an engineer and a waitress. He grew up with his brother and his sister and spent a lot of time with his grandfather. When his grandfather died, Johnny was seven years old and he was very sad. His family went to Florida and in the next years, they had to change homes often. Johnny became worse at school and had his first experiences with drugs at the age of 15. He was thrown out of school and started to make music in a band called "The Flame", and later on "The Kids". He has one daughter, Lily-rose and one son Jack and is currently married to a French singer, Vanessa Paradis.
His first movie was "Nightmare on Elm Street" in 1984, which was quite a success. Afterwards, he decided to go to an acting school in Los Angeles. He got a small part in the movie "Platoon" and shortly after this, he was offered a part in the TV series "21 Jump Street" which he first turned down but finally accepted.
Since then he has been a star. Young people loved him, but this was not what he liked, so he took drugs and was in the news because of this. But his career went on and he played in lots of famous movies.
Today, Johnny Depp is one of Hollywood's most liked actors who can play in a huge range of roles. Normally he plays rather queer guys, for example in "Finding Neverland". He is not only liked for his look but also for his talent to act and his incomparable gestures.
Johnny's amazing acting brought him an abounding amount of dedicated fans. His success in his current movies has put him in an excellent position, bringing him enormous amounts of money to support his children.
Currently, Depp is living in France but also has a home in the States. Johnny has been getting used to the fact of living around French people, but his French is truthfully not completely accurate. Depp has also bought a nice, relaxing island that helps him calm his nerves.
Throughout his lifetime, Johnny has been through several occupations but not everyone knows that he owned a club; The Viper Room.
