Julia Fischer (born June 15, 1983) is a German violinist. By training she is also a professional pianist, but she rarely appears as such in public.
Biography.
Julia Fischer, born in Munich, Germany, is of German-Slovakian parentage. Her mother came from the German minority in Slovakia and immigrated from Košice in Slovakia to the Federal Republic of Germany in 1972. Her German father moved in the same year from Eastern Saxony to West Germany.
In fall 2004 the label PentaTone released Julia Fischer's first CD: Russian violin concertos with Yakov Kreizberg and the Russian National Orchestra.
Julia Fischer began her studies before her fourth birthday, when she received her first violin lesson from Helge Thelen; a few months later she started studying the piano with her mother Viera Fischer. Fischer said, "my mother's a pianist and I wanted to play the piano as well, but as my elder brother also played the piano, she thought it would be nice to have another instrument in the family. I agreed to try out the violin and stayed with it." She began her formal violin education at the Leopold Mozart Conservatory in Augsburg. At the age of nine Julia Fischer went to the Munich Academy of Music.
Among the most prestigious competitions that Julia Fischer has won are the International Yehudi Menuhin Violin Competition under Lord Yehudi Menuhin's supervision, where she won both the first prize and the special prize for best Bach solo work performance in 1995 and the Eighth Eurovision Competition for Young Instrumentalists in 1996, which was broadcast in 22 countries from Lisbon. In 1997 Julia Fischer was awarded the “Prix d‘Espoir” by the Foundation of European Industry. She recently had the opportunity to play Mozart's own violin in the room in which he was born at Salzburg to honor his 250th birthday.
Her repertoire (from Bach to Penderecki, from Vivaldi to Shostakovitch), contains over 40 works with orchestra and about 60 works of chamber music.
Instrument.
Currently she plays on a Guadagnini 1750 which she purchased in summer 2004.
For four years since 2000, she had been using a Stradivarius, the 1716 Booth, on a loan from Nippon Music Foundation. Before the Strad, she had a Guarneri del Gesù and a Gagliano. She uses two bows, one a copy of the Heifetz Tourte by the Viennese maker Thomas Gerbeth, the other a French bow when she needs to rehair the Tourte.
Prizes and honors.
Julia Fischer has won five prizes for her violin playing and three prizes for her piano playing a.o. at "Jugend musiziert". She won all eight competitions she entered.
Family.
Mother: Viera Fischer, maiden name Krenková, born in Nové Zámky Slovakia, pianist
Father: Frank-Michael Fischer, a university-educated mathematician
