John O'Meally (b. 1841) - (d. November 19, 1863) was an Australian bushranger. He was one of Frank Gardiner's gang that robbed the gold escort coach at Eugowra.
Early life.
O'Meally worked as a stockman, looking after cattle and sheep on his father's farm, Arramagong Station in the Lachlan River valley. His father, Paddy O'Meally, also ran a shanty (a very basic hotel), called "The Weddin Inn", on Emu Creek. The inn was the only hotel in the district. John OMeally, and another one of Gardiner's gang, Alex Fordyce, sometimes worked at the shanty. The gold escort robbery was planned there.
Bushranger with Frank Gardiner.
On 15 June 1862 the gold escort coach that took the gold from the goldfields of Forbes to Bathurst was robbed. This was one of Australia's biggest robberies. O'Meally and several of his friends were in the gang led by Frank Gardiner. A week after the robbery the police, led by Sir Frederick Pottinger, captured one of the robbers, Henry Manns, and Charlie Gilbert. Charlie Gilbert was the brother of gang member John Gilbert. John Gilbert had nearly been captured but was able to escape. He went straight to "The Weddin Inn", and together with Ben Hall and O'Meally, captured the police and released the prisoners.
Bushranger with Ben Hall.
In July 1863, O'Meally and Gilbert tried to rob the bank at Carcoar in broad daylight. This is believed to be the first daylight bank robbery in Australia.
On August 30, 1863, O'Meally tried to rob John Barnes near Wallendbeen station (farm). Barnes owned shops in Cootamundra and Murrumburrah. O'Meally told him to stop and give the bushranger his saddle. Barnes rode off to try and get away, but O'Meally shot and killed him. Barnes is buried in the Cootamundra cemetery.
The battle of Goimbla.
O'Meally was shot and killed while trying to rob Goimbla station (farm) near Eugowra, on November 19, 1863. This event became known as the "Battle of Goimbla." The Campbell family fought off the Ben Hall gang in during a 2 hour battle. The National Musuem of Australia has several items in its collection about the battle.
John O'Meally is buried in an unmarked grave in the Anglican cemetery at Gooloogong.
