John Stephen Piper (born January 11, 1946, Chattanooga, Tennessee) is a Reformed Baptist theologian, preacher, and author. He is the pastor of Bethlehem Baptist Church in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and has written many books. He started the evangelical ministry named Desiring God.
Early life.
Piper was born in Chattanooga, Tennessee. He is the son of Bill and Ruth Piper. When he and his older sister were still young, the Pipers moved to Greenville, South Carolina. He spent the rest of his childhood there. He later graduated from Wade Hampton High School. His father was an evangelist who worked with international radio and Bible programs until his death on March 6, 2007.
College years.
Piper went to Wheaton College in 1964-68. He majored in literature, and minored in philosophy. Because he studies Romantic Literature in college, he went on to enjoy it in life. Today he writes poems for special family things, and well as making story-poems (from the life of biblical characters).
Following college, he took a Bachelor of Divinity degree at Fuller Theological Seminary in Pasadena, California (1968-71). While there, he took several courses where he learned the writings of Jonathan Edwards. He also did some doctoral work in New Testament Studies in Munich, West Germany (1971-1974).
Middle life.
In 1980, after what he said was something that he could not turn down, he became a preacher. Piper became Pastor of Bethlehem Baptist Church in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He has been working there ever since. Piper became popular when his book "Desiring God: Meditations of a Christian Hedonist" was published. He has written many books since. In 1994, he started Desiring God Ministries. Today "Desiring God" puts all of Piper's sermons and articles from the last three decades online for free, as well as offering books, CDs, and DVDs.
On January 11, 2006, Piper told that he had prostate cancer. According to a letter sent to his church, he and his doctors thought that the cancer was not a big problem. When Piper talked about this he said, "This news has, of course, been good for me. The most dangerous thing in the world is the sin of self-reliance and the stupor of worldliness. The news of cancer has a wonderfully blasting effect on both. I thank God for that. The times with Christ in these days have been unusually sweet." Piper had very good surgery on February 14, 2006. He married Noël Henry in 1968, and they now have four sons, a daughter, and several grandchildren.
Christian hedonism.
Piper calls himself a Christian Hedonist and teaches that "God is most glorified in us when we are most satisfied in him." He also teaches that God's highest pursuit and man's deepest happiness are the same in one pursuit – namely, "the pursuit of joy in God." He was learned this theory in the writings of Jonathan Edwards, Blaise Pascal, and C. S. Lewis, among others.
Salvation.
Piper believes in justification by faith alone apart from good works. His teachings talk about the need for the Christian to have faith, sanctification, as this is evidence of God's saving grace. Piper says that someone who says they are a Christian, but does not act Christian, shows that they were never a true believer.
Rapture beliefs.
Piper believes in the view of the Rapture of and second coming Jesus Christ. He believes that teaches many ethnic Israeli people will be saved at Jesus' second coming.
Old Testament.
Piper is very neutral about the Torah in Judaism. He says that it was made by God to reveal sin and show that man does not live up to God's righteous standards. Christians, living under the New Testament, are not under the Old Testament law, and are able to complete it through faith in Jesus Christ.
Piper teaches that God has only one chosen people, mostly Jews in the Old Testament. but he believes now that relationship has been won by the Christian church. So, the Church is rightful inheritor of all the promises made to Israel, and Jews who don't take Jesus as Messiah have no right to this blessing.
Spiritual gifts.
On the topic of spiritual gifts, Piper believes that supernatural gifts such as miracles, healings, and speaking in tongues are around today. He does not believe that the job of apostle is worked today. He also believes that the gift of prophecy in the church is not from God.
Some of the books he wrote.
Most of Piper's books can be read for free at Desiring God.
