Kornwestheim is a city in Baden-Württemberg. It is the third biggest city of the Ludwigsburg district, behind Ludwigsburg and Bietigheim Bissingen.
Since 1956, Kornwestheim has been an administrative district town in Baden-Württemberg.
Geography.
Kornwestheim lies about 10 km in the north of Stuttgart. In the southwest "Neckarbecken" at the east edge of the "Strohgäus" in "being enough so mentioned field". In the city the wood or Gänsbach flows eastward to the Neckar.
Neighbour cities.
Möglingen, Ludwigsburg and Remseck at the Neckar (all district Ludwigsburg) as well as Stuttgart (urban area)
City arrangement.
The city of Kornwestheim consists of the town center and the quarter Pattonville. The latter became only at the beginning of the 1990er years part of the city Kornwestheim. Originally it belonged to the Gemarkung Aldingen. In the year 1954 were established the settlement by the US army. After their departure a Company bought the area of the federation and divided it on the city Kornwestheim and the municipality Remseck a corner at the Neckar up. Afterwards the new quarter civilian one settled. The western part belonged since that time to the city grain west home, the larger, eastern part to the city Remseck a corner at the Neckar.
City hall tower.
The city hall tower was built in the year 1935 and is with 9°11'11 of " eastern length and 48°51'39 " northern latitude, serves not only as city hall tower, but also as water tower with a container of 800 cubic meters volumes and as clock tower.
Space planning.
Kornwestheim forms a central center with the neighbouring district town Ludwigsburg within the region Stuttgart, whose upper center is Stuttgart. To the central range Ludwigsburg/Kornwestheim belongs still the cities and municipalities in the south and the east of the district Ludwigsburg, in detail: Affalterbach, Asperg, Benningen at the Neckar, earthling living, free mountain at the Neckar, Grossbottwar, Hemmingen, Marbach at the Neckar, Markgröningen, Möglingen, Murr, Pleidelsheim, Remseck a corner at the Neckar, Schwieberdingen and Steinheim to the Murr.
