Klaus Ebner (August 8, 1964 in Vienna) is an Austrian writer of short stories, essays and poetry, and a translator. In the early 1990s he wrote books about computer software and published literary works in magazines. His first book of short stories was published in 2007. Ebner writes poetry in German and in Catalan.
Biography.
In the 1980s, he studied Romance languages, German and Translation at the University of Vienna. He also worked for a literary group and a magazine for literature in Vienna. Afterwards he worked as a translator, language teacher and IT project manager. In the 1990s, he published articles and books about software and computer networks; these books were in German, but he also wrote articles in English. In 2001 he wrote a university paper about islamism in Europe, which has been published later in Germany.
After school, Klaus Ebner has begun to write short stories, poetry and radio plays. He usually published them in magazines of literature and culture. After the year 2004, he published literary texts much more often. Today, Klaus Ebner is an author of fiction (novels, short stories), essays and poems. He writes poetry in German and Catalan. Supported by the Austrian government, he went to Andorra in 2007 and wrote an essay about the country in the Pyrenees.
In 2008 Klaus Ebner got the Wiener Werkstattpreis of 2007. The winning short story "Der Flügel Last (The Burden of the Wings)" shows a seven year old girl who has cancer. The story is told as if the girl would tell it herself. In the winning essay "Was blieb vom Weißen Ritter? (What do we still have of the White Knight?)", the reader learns about the novel from the Middle Ages "Tirant lo Blanch" by Joanot Martorell from Valencia. The author mixed his own reading experience with information from history and literature.
Klaus Ebner is living and working in Vienna. He is a member of the Austrian Writers' Associations "Grazer Autorenversammlung (GAV)" and "Österreichischer Schriftstellerverband (ÖSV)".
