"Kirby's Adventure", called in Japan, is a platform video game made by HAL Laboratory and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS game console. It was remade for the Game Boy Advance as '.
Plot.
After Kirby wakes up from his after-lunch nap without having any dreams, he goes to the Fountain of Dreams to investigate. In doing so, he discovers that King Dedede has stolen the Star Rod, the source of the Fountain of Dreams's power, and broken it into seven pieces, giving six fragments to his allies and keeping one himself. Without the Star Rod, all of the inhabitants of Dream Land are becoming restless and unable to dream. Kirby decides to track down the fragments of the Star Rod and bring them back to the Fountain of Dreams in order to restore everyones' dreams.
Kirby travels throughout seven worlds, battling enemies, mini-bosses, and bosses through treacherous terrain in order to collect all seven fragments of the Star Rod. Once Kirby defeats King Dedede and rebuilds the Star Rod, he places it back into the Fountain of Dreams. However, an ominous black aura fills the skies as a dark creature named Nightmare emerges from the fountain. It turns out that Nightmare had corrupted the Star Rod, and King Dedede removed the Star Rod, broke it, and spread it across Dream Land with the intention of protecting Dream Land. Nightmare then flies off into space, and King Dedede inhales Kirby and the Star Rod and spits them into the air. Kirby then uses the Star Rod to defeat both forms of Nightmare, and saves Dream Land once again.
Gameplay.
Like most of the of Kirby video games, Kirby's Adventure is a platformer. The objective of each level is to reach the level goal, by a combination of walking, jumping, and flying. Throughout the levels are enemies and obstacles which serve to hinder and yet sometimes assist Kirby. If Kirby touches an enemy, he will take one point of damage (out of six health points). Occasionally, Kirby will encounter a mini-boss. In order to proceed, the player must battle it until the mini-boss' health meter empties.
Unlike Kirby's Dream Land, Kirby's Adventure has a save feature and will automatically save the player's game after every level beaten. This allows players to access and replay any level in any world that Kirby has reached through doors littered throughout each world. There are seven worlds in the game, with each world featuring a minimum of four and a maximum of six regular levels, a Warp Star door (which allows Kirby move from world to world), and a boss door. In addition, each world (with the exception of world 7) has one mini-game, one museum (which feature an unlimited supply of a particular enemy for Kirby to copy), and one Arena (where Kirby must do battle with one mini-boss and can win a Maxim Tomato recovery item).
As in Kirby's Dream Land, Kirby has four basic abilities: walking, jumping, flying, and inhaling. By continuously flying, Kirby can reach any height not blocked by an object or obstacle. At any time when Kirby has inhaled air, he can exhale cancelling his flight. When the air is released, Kirby will exhale a puff of air, which can be used to damage enemies or destroy blocks.
Kirby's offensive techniques hinge on his ability to inhale enemies, objects, or food. Kirby can indefinitely inhale, and if an enemy, object, or food is in range, Kirby will eat it. When food is inhaled, it is automatically swallowed and will heal Kirby if he has any damage. When Kirby inhales an enemy or object, it remains in his mouth. At this point, Kirby can either shoot it out as a star that causes damage to anything in its path, or simply swallow it. Alternatively, Kirby can slide tackle by ducking and pressing the a or b button - kicking enemies to defeat them.
Upon swallowing an enemy, if that enemy possesses a power, Kirby can "copy" that enemy. Kirby's Adventure is the first game in the series to allow Kirby to gain powers through swallowing certain enemies and Kirby has a number of enemy powers at his disposal, the most common being the Beam ability (which is acquired from Waddle Doo). Some abilities are necessary to solve puzzles, such as using the fire ability to light a fuse, or the hammer ability to pound down a post.
Music.
An official soundtrack was released in Japan on July 21, 1994 by Sony. The vocalist was Mako Miyata.
Remake.
In 2002, a remake of Kirby's Adventure titled Kirby: Nightmare in Dream Land was released for the Game Boy Advance. The new version has, in addition to new visuals and sound, different minigames, a multiplayer mode, and other new features. However, it also had some criticism for the omission of certain materials that pushed the NES to its limit, and replaced by what is often considered lazy for the Game Boy Advance. For instance, the rotating pseudo-3D towers in Butter Building were removed. In addition, the difficulty is significantly lower.
A demo of Kirby's Adventure is available in Super Smash Bros. Brawl for the Wii console.
