Kidneys are two organs in the abdomen of vertebrates that are shaped like beans. They make urine (the yellow waste water that comes out of the urethra.) They are part of the urinary system. When people talk about kidneys they sometimes use the word "renal". For example, "renal failure" is when the kidneys are sick and do not work. The prefix "nephro-" is also used in words to mean "kidneys". For example, a "nephrologist" is a doctor who studies kidneys.
It was widely believed in Europe that the conscience was actually located in the kidneys. This idea was taken from the Hebrew Bible. But medical experts of today usually do not consider kidneys to have this kind of psychological role.
Kidney functions.
Kidneys do many things that are important to stay healthy. If someone's kidneys do not work properly, he or she might see a specialist (a nephrologist) for the necessary treatment.
Makes hormones.
The kidney makes hormones. The two most important ones that it makes are erythropoetin and renin.
Erythropoetin is made by the kidneys if there is less oxygen in the kidney. Erythropoetin tells the bone marrow to make more red blood cells. Red blood cells carry oxygen in the blood. So this means there will be more oxygen carried in the blood.
Renin is made by the kidney if there is low blood pressure, low volume of blood, or too low salts in the blood. Renin tells the blood vessels to be smaller. It tells the adrenal gland to make aldosterone (which tells the kidneys to save salts.) It tells the body to drink more water. All of this makes the blood pressure go up.
Keeps homeostasis.
The kidney's most important work is keeping homeostasis. Homeostasis means that the body keeps a stable environment inside itself. The body wants to have the same amount of water, salt, and acid in the blood. This makes the body work better. The kidney keeps these things constant.
If there is too much water, the kidney puts more water in the urine. If there is not enough water, the kidney puts less water in the urine. This is why people make less urine when they are dehydrated (have not enough water in the body and are thirsty.)
Kidney diseases.
There are many types of kidney diseases. If kidney disease makes the kidneys not able to do but they do work in part. People can have mild renal failure and have no symptoms. As long as it does not become worse, people may not even know they have it. "Severe" renal failure means "very" bad failure. The kidneys do not work very much at all. People with severe renal failure "always" have symptoms. They may need special care from doctors to live.
Renal replacement.
People who do not have good kidneys are "very" sick. If they have severe renal failure, they cannot live unless they have a "replacement" for their kidneys. Replacement is something that takes the place of something else.
There are two ways to replace the kidneys: dialysis and transplantation
Kidney dialysis.
Dialysis is when doctors use a machine and medicines to do the work that kidneys do. There are two kinds of dialysis: hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.
Peritoneal dialysis is when doctors put a plastic tube into the persons abdomen. Every day the person fills the abdomen with fluid. The extra salts, waste, and water that the body does not need goes into the fluid. Then the fluid comes out and takes the wastes with it. This does part of the job that kidneys do.
Hemodialysis is when doctors take blood from a person, clean the blood with a special kind of filter, called "haemodialyser", managed through a special machine, and put it back in the person. When the blood is cleaned, water, salts, and wastes are taken out of it. This must be done 2-4 times every week (usually 3 times.) It takes 2-4 hours to do this each time.
Hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis are not perfect. They do some of the work of the kidney, but it is not as good as a real kidney. So people who need dialysis are not as healthy. They must take medicines also. For example, in kidney failure, the kidneys do not make erythropoetin. So doctors have to give people erythropoetin so they make enough red blood cells.
Transplant.
A better way to do the kidneys' work is to give the person another kidney. This is called a renal transplant. Kidney transplants are the most common organ transplant that happens. It is more common because we have two kidneys, but only need one kidney to live. People who are alive can donate a kidney to another person. With other organs, the donor must be dead first.
Even transplants are not the same as kidneys people were born with. A person who gets a renal transplants must take strong medicines to stop their body from attacking the new kidney. Sometimes, after years, the transplanted kidney stops working. But sometimes a patient can get a new transplanted kidney after the first one stops working.
