The Komodo dragon ("Varanus komodoensis") is a species of lizard that lives in the islands of Komodo, Rinca, Flores, Gili Motang, and Gili Dasami, in central Indonesia. A monitor lizard, it is the largest living species of lizard, growing to an average length of 2–3 meters (approximately 6.5–10 ft) and weighing around 70 kilograms (154 lb). Their large size is due to the fact that there are no other carnivorous mammals to fill the niche on the islands where they live, and also to the Komodo dragon's low metabolic rate. As a result of their size, these lizards dominating the ecosystems in which they live. Although Komodo dragons eat mostly carrion, they will also hunt and ambush prey including invertebrates, birds, and mammals.
Mating begins between May and August, and the eggs are laid in September. About twenty eggs are deposited in abandoned megapode nests and incubated for seven to eight months, hatching in April, when insects are most plentiful. Young Komodo dragons live in trees, where they are safe from predators and adult Komodo dragons. They take around three to five years to mature, and may live as long as fifty years. They are capable of parthenogenesis, in which a female gives birth without male fertilization.
Komodo dragons were discovered by Western scientists in 1910. Their large size and fearsome looks makes them popular zoo exhibits. They are listed as vulnerable by the IUCN and protected under Indonesian law. A national park, Komodo National Park, was created to help protect Komodo dragons.
The Komodo dragon can also be called the Komodo Monitor or the Komodo Island Monitor in science books and journals, although this is not very common. The people who live in Komodo Island call it the "ora", "buaja durat" (land crocodile) or "biawak raksasa" (giant monitor).
Evolution.
The evolutionary development of the Komodo dragon starts with the "Varanus" genus, which evolved in Asia about 40 million years ago and moved down to Australia. Around 15 million years ago, Australia and Southeast Asia crashed into each other, allowing the lizards to move into what is now the Indonesia. The Komodo dragon is believed to have evolved from its Australian ancestors 4 million years ago, living as far east as the island of Timor. The Ice Age created great sea level changes that left the Komodo dragons stranded on the islands in which they live today. It is believed that the Komodo Dragon was once a fire breathing dragon. Resent research has discovered that fossils of these great creatures had glands on their ears.
Description.
In the wild, an adult Komodo dragon usually weighs around 70 kilograms (154 lb), but captive Komodo dragons often weigh more. The largest wild one ever measured was 3.13 meters (10 ft 3 in) long and weighed 166 kilograms (365 lb). The Komodo dragon has a tail as long as their body, as well as about 60 sharp teeth that can grow up to 2.5 centimeters (1 inch) in length. Its saliva is red because its teeth are almost completely covered by their gums; when they eat, their teeth cut their gums and cause them to bleed. This creates an ideal culture for the virulent bacteria that live in its mouth. It also has a long, yellow, forked tongue.
Senses.
The Komodo dragon is not very good at hearing, even though its earholes are easy to see. It is able to see as far away as 300 meters (985 feet), but it is thought to have poor night vision. The Komodo dragon is able to see in color, but has trouble seeing objects that do not move.
The Komodo dragon uses its tongue to taste and smell, something that many other reptiles do. They can do this with an organ called the Jacobson's organ. With the help of a good wind, they may be able to smell carrion from 4–9.5 kilometres (2.5–6 mi) away. The Komodo dragon nostrils are not very useful for smelling, because it does not have a diaphragm. It only has a few taste buds in the back of its throat. Its scales have special sensory plaques connected to nerves that gives it its sense of touch. The scales around its ears, lips, chin, and soles of the feet may have three or more sensory plaques.
Ecology.
The Komodo dragon prefers hot and dry places, and lives in dry open grassland, savanna, and tropical forest on lower land. It is most active in the day because it is cold-blooded, although it is sometimes active at night. Komodo dragons live alone, coming together only to breed and eat. They can sprint up to 20 kilometers per hour (12.4 mph), dive up to 4.5 metres (15 ft), and, when they are young, climb trees with their strong claws. To catch prey that is out of reach, the Komodo dragon may stand on its hind legs and use its tail as a support. As the Komodo dragon grows bigger, its claws are used mostly as weapons, because it is too big to climb trees well.
For shelter, the Komodo dragon digs holes that can measure from 1–3 metres (3–10 ft) wide with its powerful legs and claws. Because of its large size and habit of sleeping in these burrows, it is able to keeps itself warm through the night. The Komodo dragon usually hunts in the afternoon, but stays in the shade during the hottest part of the day. Komodo dragons have special resting places on ridges that catch cool sea breezes.
Diet.
Komodo dragons are carnivores, which means that they eat meat. Although they eat mostly carrion (dead animals), they will also ambush live prey. When prey goes by a Komodo dragon, it will suddenly charge at the animal and go for the belly or the throat. It is able to locate its prey using its keen sense of smell, which can locate a dead or dying animal up to 9.5 kilometers (6 miles) away.
Komodo dragons eat by tearing large chunks of flesh and swallowing them whole. For smaller prey up to the size of a goat, its flexible jaws, skull, and expandable stomach allow it to swallow its prey whole. Everything is eaten except for the plant remains in its prey's stomach and intestines. The Komodo dragons produces much saliva to help lubricate the food, but swallowing still takes a long time (15–20 minutes to swallow a goat). Komodo dragons may attempt to speed up its swallowing by ramming the carcass against a tree to force it down its throat, sometimes hitting the tree so hard that it gets knocked down. To prevent itself from suffocating while swallowing, it breathes using a small tube under the tongue that connects to the lungs. Komodo dragons can eat up to 80 percent of its body weight in one meal. After swallowing its food, it drags itself to a sunny location to speed up digestion so the food does not rot and poison the dragon. Large dragons can survive on as little as 12 meals a year. After digestion, the Komodo dragon regurgitates horns, hair, and teeth covered in smelly mucus. After regurgitating, it rubs its face in the dirt or on bushes to get rid of the mucus, suggesting that it, like humans, does not appreciate the smell.
The largest animals generally eat first, while the smaller ones follow. Dragons of equal size may wrestle each other. Losers usually run away, although sometimes they are chased and eaten by the winners.
The Komodo dragon's diet includes invertebrates, other reptiles (including smaller Komodo dragons), birds, bird eggs, small mammals, monkeys, wild boars, goats, deer, horses, and water buffalos. Young Komodo dragons will eat insects, eggs, geckoes, and small mammals. Occasionally Komodo dragons consume humans and human corpses, digging up bodies from their graves to do so. As a result, the villagers of Komodo moved their graves from sandy to clay ground and piled rocks on top of graves to prevent the lizards from digging them up. The Komodo dragon may have evolved to feed on the extinct dwarf elephant "Stegodon" that once lived on Flores, according to evolutionary biologist Jared Diamond. The Komodo dragon has also been observed intentionally surprising a pregnant deer, causing it to miscarry so that the Komodo dragon can eat it.
Because the Komodo dragon does not have a diaphragm, it cannot suck water when drinking, nor can it lap water with its tongue. Instead, it drinks by taking a mouthful of water, lifting its head, and letting the water run down its throat.
Komodo dragons have dangerous bacteria in their saliva, of which 57 have been isolated. These bacteria cause septicemia in their victim; if an bite does not kill the prey animal and it escapes, it will commonly die within a week from infection. The deadliest bacteria in Komodo dragon saliva appears to be a very deadly strain of "Pasteurella multocida", from studies performed with lab mice. Because the Komodo dragon appears immune to its own bacteria, much research has been done searching for the antibacterial molecule it possesses in the hopes of human medicinal use.
