The Korean War(Korean:한국 전쟁 or 한국전쟁) was a war fought in Korea between armies from North Korea and from South Korea. The war began on 4:30 AM on June 25, 1950 and fighting stopped July 27, 1953. More than two million Koreans died, most of them in the north.
Both sides blame each other for starting the war. The north, led by communist Kim Il-Sung, was helped mostly by People's Republic of China, and the USSR. The south, led by nationalist Syngman Rhee, was helped by many countries in the United Nations, and especially by the United States. The war ended with a truce. South Korea and North Korea are still officially at war, and the United States still keeps troops in South Korea, in case North Korea ever invades again.
Causes.
"The Cold War."
The Cold War was an important cause in the Korean War. Relations between the USA and the USSR were bad (or they felt very cold about each other) and when China became Communist in October 1949, the President of the USA, Harry Truman, was very worried that other countries around China may also become Communist, such as Japan.
Truman had just spent a lot of money to make the American Army much bigger and Americans wanted to see this new powerful Army in action. Joseph Stalin's people also wanted to see Stalin get better results. Stalin had recently lost the fight for the Berlin Wall and wanted another chance to prove that he could beat America, the Korean War was his chance.
The United Nations had just been created and a war would give it the chance to prove to people that the UN was strong and would not fail like the League of Nations had done earlier.
Syngman Rhee was also in trouble, he was a democrat surrounded by Communists. He could have made a Communist country attack him to get support from other democratic countries that would otherwise just ignore him.
Events.
March 1951 - 27th July 1953
Extra Information.
The popular television show "M*A*S*H" was about American doctors serving in the Korean War. The show lasted longer than the war did.
