A California hurricane is a tropical cyclone that affects the state of California. Usually, only the remnants (or leftovers) from a Pacific hurricane affect California. No hurricane has ever made landfall in California in recorded history, except for two tropical storms that were thought to have hit California -- one by direct landfall from offshore, another after making landfall in Mexico.
Normally, rainfall is the only effect that Pacific hurricanes have on California. Sometimes, this rainfall is strong enough to cause flooding and some damage. For example, floods from Hurricane Kathleen in 1976 created damages scattered across the southeastern California area and killed three people.
Why hurricanes do not normally hit California.
The main reason why hurricanes do not hit California is because of cold sea surface temperatures off the California coastline and the California Current.
Tropical cyclones usually need sea surface temperatures above 26.5 °C (80 °F) with a depth of 50 metres (160 feet) to survive. But the waters off the California coast are too cold for tropical cyclones, even during the summer. Normally, the waters' temperatures don't get above 17 °C (63 °F), although El Nino effects may sometimes warm the waters a little bit.
Also the California Current moves down from the northwestern US coast to the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula, which is the opposite in which Northern Hemisphere tropical cyclones move. While a few tropical cyclones may hit the southern and central areas of the Baja California peninsula, they don't make landfall any further north than that.
Hurricanes have been found to start in California and leave the coast, only to come back and hit the state again, as was IKE!
Preparations.
Because of a possible threat of Califonia hurricanes in the future and from the damaging effects of a 1858 tropical storm, the National Weather Service created tropical cyclone warning stations across the southern California coast. But because of the fact that Pacific hurricanes rarely affected California, the idea of a warning station was later brought down.
The most serious damage from a California hurricane would be from heavy rainfall rather than hurricane force-winds or a storm surge, although distant hurricanes may still create heavy surf, maybe hurting or killing people.
