This list of sex positions is a list of different ways to have sexual intercourse and other sexual acts.
Intercourse.
These positions involve a penis going into a vagina or anus.
On top with front entry.
These positions are used for vaginal or anal sex. The basic position is called the missionary position. In it, the receiving partner lies on his or her back with legs apart. The penetrating partner lies on top of the receiving partner, facing them. The penetrating partner enters so that the base of the penis rubs the clitoris.
From behind.
Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal sex.
The receiving partner is kneeling or on all four limbs. The penetrating partner inserts his penis from behind.
On top.
Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal sex.
The penetrating partner lies on their back. The receiving partner kneels on top of them for the penis to go into the vagina.
Sitting and kneeling.
Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal sex.
The penetrating partner sits down, with their legs stretched out. The receiving partner sits on top and wraps their legs around the penetrating partner. This is called pounding on the spot.
Standing.
Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal sex.
In the basic standing position, both partners stand facing each other and have vaginal sex. The shorter partner can stand on a stair if the partners are different heights. It may be easier if the woman has her back to a wall.
Anal.
Most of the above positions can be used for anal sex.
Outercourse.
Outercourse or frottage is sometimes part of foreplay or to avoid intercourse.
Genital-genital sex.
Genital-genital sex, sometimes called GG rubbing, is when two males rub penises together or when two females rub vulvae together.
Oral sex.
Oral sex is the term given to genital stimulation by the mouth. People may engage in oral sex as part of foreplay before intercourse, or during or following intercourse. It may also be performed for its own sake.
Fellatio.
Fellatio is oral sex. There are several ways to have oral sex.
Cunnilingus.
Cunnilingus is oral sex involving a woman's genitals. There are several ways to have oral sex.
69.
Oral sex between two people at the same time is called 69. Partners can be lying side-by-side, lying one on top of the other, or standing with one partner holding the other upside down.
