The League of Nations was the predecessor to the United Nations it was the post second world war league but after failing to retain peace during the second world war it was abandoned and re-created as what is known to day as the United Nations.
The League of Nations was thought up by Woodrow Wilson, the American President during the First World War. It was to be a group of nations that worked together to keep peace. One of the reasons for its downfall was that, after a vote, the American public refused to join. This meant the League did not have the power it needed to enforce any of the rules that made it up.
After a series of disasters in the 1930s, it was abolished. It was thought to be weak and powerless, after Japan completely ignored it when the League of Nations tried to stop Japan from invading Manchuria (North-East China) and Italy invaded Abyssinia.
President Woodrow Wilson arranged a plan for a “government of governments”. The idea of his plan was to settle problems between the nations. Wilson tried his hardest to persuade nations that his plan was the one needed to skirt future wars. Wilson largest and greatest unsuccessful thing was his own country not believing his theory. The United States did not want to be part of Wilson’s approach for four reasons.
First of all the United States consisted of many Americans being German immigrants and loathed the Treaty of Versailles. The treaty said that Germany and its allies were to except full responsibility for causing the war and reparations were to be made to certain countries. The Treaty of Versailles was the treaty that set up the League of Nations and not agreeing to it meant not being part of the League of Nations.
The next reason that America didn’t want to get involved in European affairs is because they didn’t want to risk more Americans dieing in a war. They also felt that it would result in them spending more money on unnecessary objects such as sending men all around the globe. This was called isolationism. Most of the American citizens felt it would be best to just avoid European and Britain Affairs completely.
