Lester R. Brown (born 1934 in New Jersey) is an environmental analyst who has written over twenty books on global environmental issues. His books have been translated into more than forty languages. He is the founder of the Worldwatch Institute and founder and president of the Earth Policy Institute, which is a nonprofit research organization based in Washington, D.C.
His most current book is "Plan B 3.0: Mobilizing to Save Civilization". The recipient of forty honorary degrees and a MacArthur Fellowship, among numerous other awards, Brown has been described by the "Washington Post" as "one of the world's most influential thinkers." The "Telegraph" of Calcutta refers to him as “the guru of the environmental movement.” In 1986, the Library of Congress requested his personal papers noting that his writings “have already strongly affected thinking about problems of world population and resources.”
Writings.
Brown has authored or coauthored 50 books. One of the world's most widely published authors, his books have appeared in some 40 languages. Among his earlier books are "Man, Land and Food", "World Without Borders", and "Building a Sustainable Society". His 1995 book "Who Will Feed China?" challenged the official view of China’s food prospect, spawning hundreds of conferences and seminars.
In May 2001, he founded the Earth Policy Institute to provide a vision and a road map for achieving an environmentally sustainable economy. In November 2001, he published "Eco-Economy: Building an Economy for the Earth", which was hailed by E.O. Wilson as “an instant classic.” His most recent book is "Plan B 3.0: Mobilizing to Save Civilization" (2008).
Awards.
He is the recipient of many prizes and awards, including 23 honorary degrees, a MacArthur Fellowship, the 1987 United Nations' Environment Prize, the 1989 World Wide Fund for Nature Gold Medal, and the 1994 Blue Planet Prize for his "exceptional contributions to solving global environmental problems." More recently, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Italy, the Borgström Prize by the Royal Swedish Academy of Agriculture and Forestry, and appointed an honorary professor of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. In 1991, the American Humanist Association named Brown the Humanist of the Year.
