Liverpool Football Club is an English football club. They are also known as "The Reds". Liverpool F.C. was created on March 15th 1892.
The club plays in the English Premier League. The stadium they play in is Anfield.
The club is managed by Rafael Benítez, a Spanish manager, since June 2004. The club is owned by two American businessmen, George Gillett and Tom Hicks.
History.
Liverpool won their first Football League championship in 1901, and their second in 1906. They played their first FA Cup final in 1914, but lost 1-0 to Burnley. The last trophy they won was the FA Cup in May 2006. They have also won the European Champions Cup 5 times, with the 5th success in Istanbul in 2005. The game was won after Liverpool drew 3-3 with A.C. Milan and then won the penalty shootout, partly due to goalkeeper Jerzy Dudek's heroics. Liverpool F.C. are the most successful club in English football. They have won England's top football league, the Premier League (this includes the First Division), 18 times. However, they have not won a league title for 18 years.
Notable players.
Pepe Reina.
Steve Finnan, Irish international equally as good setting up in the opposition defense area as he is at chasing down opposing strikers
Jamie Carragher - (Vice captain) An English defender know for his high work rate, his passion and defensive ability.
Sami Hyypiä - (former captain) A tall Finnish defender known for his positional intelligence (meaning he knows where he has to be and when).
Daniel Agger - A Danish defender known for both his defensive abilitiy and attacking prowess (his ability in attack).
Steven Gerrard - (Captain) A box-to-box (meaning he plays all over the pitch) midfielder know for his knack of scoring spectacular and crucial goals and being the heart of Liverpool Football Club. Stevie has been voted as Premiership player of the year by the other players.
Javier Mascherano: An Argentinian defensive midfielder who his known for his fantastic tackling abilities and ability to break up play (meaning his ability to stop the other teams attacks).
Fernando Torres - A Spanish striker known for his incredible speed, quick feet and finishing ability. He is the first Liverpool player to score 20 goals in the English Premier League (England's top league) since Robbie Fowler in the mid-1990's. He has become a fan favorite at Anfield and is touted (suggested) by many as one of the best strikers in the world.
Robbie Keane - the Irish international captain.
