InuYasha.
InuYasha is the male hero of the series. He is a half-demon ("han'yō" in Japanese). His father was a demon and his mother was human. He uses a weapon called the Tetssaiga. It is a supernatural sword that is made from one of his father's fangs. This sword can destroy one hundred demons with just one swing. InuYasha can heal very fast and can recover from injuries which would kill for any average human. InuYasha loves Kikyo but things get less simple when he starts to have feelings of love for Kagome. Inuyasha is in love with Kagome but does not want her to know about it so he's mean to her at times but then he's nice at time's too.
Kagome.
Kagome is the female main character of Inuyasha. She is the reincarnation of Kikyo and lives in the present. She was a normal middle school girl until her 15th birthday, when Sota, her brother said that Buyo, their cat, had gone missing into the shrine that had the well inside it. Kagome stepped near the well when Mistress Centipede's bones came alive and pulled Kagome into the well. The bones had felt the shikon no tama inside Kagome that Kikyo had with her when she was killed. Mistress Centipede tried to get the jewel in the water when Kagome pushed Mistress Centipede with her hand. The hidden jewel suddenly showed through Kagome's hands. It cut one of the centipede's arms.
The centipede demon went away and Kagome landed on the floor of the well. She climbed up the well - now in the past - to see a place she did not see before, because it was the past. But she knew the tree that Inuyasha was sealed in by Kikyo's arrow 50 years ago. It was the tree near her house. She ran up to it. That was the first time she met Inuyasha. When the village people found her and took her to Kaede, the village's priestess realised that Kagome's the reincarnation of her sister, Kikyo. The priestess helped Kagome keep the jewel in her house in the village.
But the centipede demon was not gone. It attacked the village to get to Kagome and the shikon no tama. Kagome ran toward the well. Kaede had said the well would be pure (clean, not evil) enough to keep Mistress Centipede away. Kaede realised then that Kagome has priestess powers like Kikyo and herself because Kagome can see things only priestesses can, like the light from the well. Kagome was caught by Mistress Centipede at a tree where Inuyasha was stuck. Kagome freed Inuyasha by pulling out the arrow. Inuyasha helped kill the demon after being freed, but wanted to attack Kagome as well to get the shikon no tama inside her.
Kaede used a spell necklace left by her long-dead miko sister that was meant to calm the fierce spirit of Inuyasha on command, and was never used. Kagome found the command "Sit/Down boy!" to be most fitting to Inuyasha's dog-like manner, so now whenever Kagome says "sit!" the spell pulls Inuyasha forcefully to the ground, and Inuyasha has to listen and do what she says just like a dog would. The spell only works for Kagome. Kaede also says that Inuyasha and Kagome had to work together to find the shikon no tama (the magical jewel that had burst from Kagome's body) which broke after Kagome shot it (she was trying to shoot a demon crow trying to flee with it). That is why they go together on the adventure. They make a lot of friends along the way.
Normal Life.
Kagome knew by episode 4 that she could go from the past to her own time, where she has to work as a student in her school. This is why she is always seen wearing her school uniform. Many people have a crush (a liking of someone) on her in both eras (places in time): for example, Hojo likes Kagome at school, and Inuyasha and Koga like Kagome in the past time (but Inuyasha tries not to show it). Kagome is sometimes confused because she has tests to do, but she doesn't have a lot of time to practice. Most of the time she goes to the past to help Inuyasha find the shikon no tama - that is why she does not have much time - and her grandfather makes up funny stories on why Kagome does not go to school, and Kagome usually gets angry about that.
Kikyo and Kagome.
Kikyo was brought back from the land of the dead with tomb soil and a special type of water by the a demon named Urasue. The demon still didn't perfect her because Kikyo had no soul. So just then she caputured Kagome after she fell from the falling bridge and put her into that special water.
Miroku.
Miroku is a monk who likes pretty women (Sango does not like this). He always asks them if they could bare his children. He has a curse on him called Wind Tunnel that was made by Naraku. Naraku changed his shape into a pretty woman so that Miroku's grandfather, who also liked women, would come to Naraku. It was a trick to give him the curse. Wind Tunnel or Air Void is when Miroku can suck demons in with his right hand, just like a black hole. He uses it to fight instead of thinking that it's a curse, but it is a curse and he knows it inside because if he keeps using it and, if he waits for a long time without having a son to pass the Wind Tunnel on, he will get sucked into his own Wind Tunnel, which grows bigger every time. He wants to get revenge on Naraku for the curse so that when he's dead Miroku's curse will be gone. When he meets Kagome, Inuyasha and Shippo, he joins them.
Kirara.
Kirara is Sango's pet demon who is very loyal to her owner. She is a nekoyokai (a cat-demon in Japanese) and even if she is one of the major characters who dosn't appear alot like Shippo, she is still a clever demon who helped Midoriko, and understands Sango's feelings about Kohaku. She met Inuyasha and his friends before Sango, because she was still left in the village when Sango went away to fight the demon, which attacked the castle lord's house.
Kirara can turn from a cute, lovable small cat to a fierce big tiger-like cat. She comes to like Shippo mostly from Inuyasha's friends. She goes with Inuyasha and his friends because her owner, Sango, is going with them to revenge on Naraku.
Sango.
Sango is a demon slayer, also called yokai tajiya in Japanese. She lived with her father and brother, with her job as killing bad demons and collecting the shikon no tama, messed with darkness because of the badness of the demons who had it. She would give the jewel to those who could make it a good jewel and purify it, like Kikyo did.
But everything went wrong (not right, bad) in episode 24, where her brother, Kohaku, finally becomes a demon slayer himself for the first time one night. They go on his first hunt (when you try and kill something) with the other slayers (his family and friends) including Sango, when Kohaku acts very strangely. After killing the demon they were ordered to, by a castle lord who looks at how all the slayers are doing, Kohaku uses his weapon to kill all of his family except for Sango. Sango finds out that the castle lord, possessed by a spider demon (meaning a demon went inside him to control him), who used spider webs to control Kohaku. Sango is mad that the demon did that so she tries to kill the castle lord when Kohaku attacks her on her back. She falls down, with Kohaku, because the castle lord orders for the guards to attack the siblings so they get hurt. Kagewaki Hitomi, the prince of the castle kills his own possessed father, the lord, to show that he was being controlled by a demon. Everyone makes a burial for the poor, dead slayers.
Naraku was really planning (knowing and making sure) for this to happen, possessing the castle lord, so that he could call his friend demons, who wanted to revenge on the slayers, to come to the slayers' village to ruin it. Naraku then tells Kagewaki Hitomi that Inuyasha had done it. Sango, still alive but badly hurt and in treatment of the prince, comes out of the house to say that she is ready to fight Inuyasha, and get back at him for what she heard he did. But when she finds out that Inuyasha's not a bad demon, and Naraku was the one who betrayed them, she joins Inuyasha, Kagome, Shippo and Miroku to get back at Naraku (who everyone wants to revenge on) instead of killing Inuyasha. Sango has a pet called Kirara.
Shippo.
Shippo is a young Kitsune youkai (baby fox demon in Japanese) who lost his father, killed by the Thunder Brothers. Shippo is fifty years old, but he appears about five- this is because demons age much slower than humans do. He wants to steal the Shikon no Tama from Kagome and Inuyasha when he finds them, so that he can have enough power to revenge on the Thunder Brothers. He has the power to turn into different shapes, and so turned into a large, pink ball that he usually turns into, to scare them off, but Inuyasha just wins over him, laughing at him for being stupid. Kagome feels for Shippo even so, and orders Inuyasha to "Sit!"
But when Shippo gets to steal the jewel, when he is alone with Inuyasha and makes a heavy stone to go on Inuyasha's hand, Kagome follows him to find him caught with the Thunder Brothers. Kagome is also kidnapped soon after, and Inuyasha comes to save the two of them.
He soon wins over the Thunder Brothers, who had the of Shippo's father for their. Because the soul of Shippo's father still wanted to protect Shippo, the fox-fire saved Kagome and Shippo when they are in the fire made by one of the Thunder Brothers. Shippo, because he didn't have anywhere to go, he follows Kagome and Inuyasha on their adventure. Shippo can also make a small, blue fox-fire like his father. He seems to care about many young girls of his age, for example Satsuki, his first love. He also likes Kirara, Sango's pet demon they met at episode 24.
Although Shippo's name can mean seven treasures in Japanese, "Shippo" can also mean "tail". This makes sense because Shippo has a big, fluffy tail.
Naraku.
Naraku is an evil demon made by Onigumo, who loved Kikyo. When Onigumo became jealous of Inuyasha, he made many demons, led by a spider demon, come to him with his impure (bad) mind of jealousy. This is because demons like bad minds. The spider demon tells Onigumo that if Onigumo wants revenge on Inuyasha, he has to let the demons eat his soul and join with him to fight off Inuyasha. When Onigumo agrees, Naraku is created. Naraku has a heart made out of Onigumo's soul, which still loves Kikyo. But Naraku is evil because many demons joined him, just like the demons made by Midoriko's lover, and kills Kikyo while to be Inuyasha. This is so that Kikyo would think the real Inuyasha killed her. Naraku did this to get the shikon no tama for himself, and didn't want Kikyo to hand it to Inuyasha.
Kikyo seals Inuyasha because of this, when Inuyasha runs away with the shikon no tama because Naraku also turned into Kikyo to say things to hurt Inuyasha, who thought it was the real Kikyo. Thinking that Kikyo wouldn't give him the shikon no tama as promised, he steals it. Kikyo thinks then that Inuyasha is betraying her so she shoots an arrow at him.
Nobody knows about Naraku until episode 15, where Miroku tells Inuyasha and Kagome about a demon who gave a curse called Wind Tunnel on him. Naraku really gave the curse to Miroku's grandfather, who thought Naraku was a real woman since Naraku turned into a woman to fool the grandfather. The curse has to go on until they win against Naraku. This is how Miroku joins in.
Naraku also tells the other demons in episode 24 to attack a village where no demon are left, because Naraku controlled Kohaku, a demon slayer, to kill the rest of the slayers. Sango, Kohaku's sister, who is still alive tries to kill Naraku who attacked her village. This is how Sango joins in.
Basically, Naraku is the reason why everyone met each other... they are also planning to kill him as well as finding the shikon no tama that broke into pieces. Naraku is also trying to gather the pieces so that he can become a full demon, because he's a half-demon and half-human since with Onigumo, a human, joined with demons.
As well as being able to change into different people, Naraku can also make parts of his body come apart (detach) from him. They are usually called his detachments or incarnations. He made many of them including Kagura, Hakudoshi, Akago and Musou. Akago and Musou were to make himself not like Kikyo anymore because of Onigumo.
Kaede.
Kaede is Kikyo's stubborn (she never changes her mind) sister, who lived for 50 years after Kikyo died and meets Kagome. She is the one who found out that Kagome was her sister Kikyo's reincarnation, and tells Inuyasha and Kagome to work together, because Kagome also has the priestess powers that Kikyo once had. She tells both of them that Kagome can see the Shikon no Tama unlike other people, and because Inuyasha cannot see the jewel but is strong enough to fight for it, they can work together. She loves her sister more than anything. She wishes that Kikyo's soul would rest in peace, from the day when Kikyo came alive again as a doll, because of Urasue.
Kikyo.
Kikyo was a girl priest, also called priestess or miko. She was cursed to die if she loved someone. She did not think she was a normal person because of her priestess powers (spiritiual powers). She thought that she did not belong anywhere normal. InuYasha, a half-demon, and half-human also did not belong on any side and wanted to become a full demon, just like Kikyo wanting to become normal. This is why Kikyo felt the same as Inuyasha. Because of this they came to love each other. After they both loved each other, Kikyo promises to Inuyasha that she will give him shikon no tama, which she has to look after (which she also is a priestess for), if Inuyasha uses it to become a full human instead of a full demon. This would make Kikyo normal again, because she's not a priestess any more and Inuyasha is also normal, human husband.
Naraku, an evil demon made by Onigumo, loved Kikyo and was jealous of InuYasha. Naraku could change his shape into different people. He wanted the jewel that Kikyo had, the Shikon no Tama. The jewel would free him from Onigumo's orders (heart) telling him not to kill Kikyo. In the beginning of story, Naraku turned into Inuyasha and talked to Kikyo. Next, he turned Kikyo and talked to InuYasha. He said things that hurt them. He did this to make them hate each other. Kikyo nearly died because Naraku turned into Inuyasha and attacked her.
Urasue, a doll-maker, made a clay doll that looked just like Kikyo. She made it to give Kikyo half the soul of Kagome, Kikyo's reincarnation. Kikyo and the doll are the same people so the doll-Kikyo would have the same soul. Kikyo killed Urasue and ran away from Kagome. She had found out that Kagome would control the soul inside her so that it might go back inside Kagome. She hates Inuyasha too, because before she died, she hated him. She became jealous of Kagome because of Inuyasha liking both her and Kikyo but she got over it soon. Kagome was still jealous of Kikyo - even though they are the same person.
Death.
Only in the manga, Kikyo dies because she did not go well on destroying Naraku. She tried to kill him by using her arrows to purify (make it good) the finished, whole Shikon no Tama when it was with Naraku, because Naraku could not win over pure (good) things and the jewel, when it was complete, would be make the purity even more powerful with its own power. Kikyo hoped that the side of Naraku's soul would win over the evil, demons' souls inside the jewel, but Naraku was too strong for the goodness. He attacked Kikyo with his badness, because he didn't have a heart that loved her any more and Kikyo's messed up goodness of her heart made her spiritual powers go away. This is why she died.
This episode ends with Kikyo dying after Inuyasha kisses her. She wishes that Kagome would not cry, because she is happy since her soul can rest from living a doll-like life. But Kagome does cry. Sango is also sad because she knew that Kikyo cared for Kohaku, her brother, and would do anything if she could not kill him.
Kohaku.
Kohaku is Sango's brother. He was a boy who used to never like fighting, but when he finally becomes a demon, he is controlled by a spider demon, to kill his own family. Kohaku also dies because of the castle lord's soldiers attacking him for madness. Only his sister Sango didn't die, and tries to revenge on Naraku for planning this to happen.
Kohaku is alive even so, because Naraku uses a piece from the Shikon no Tama on his back. The jewel's power made him alive again. But all his memories are gone, and he can only listen to whatever Naraku tells him to do. He also doesn't remember Sango, who is happy to see that he is alive. But Sango is sad to find his brother killing more people because of Naraku ordering him to. Sango's new aim is to also save Kohaku from Naraku's control.
Midoriko.
Midoriko was a priestess who was so strong that she was the same as 100 of Japanese soldiers called Samurais. She had 4 pure (good) souls inside her: Aramitama (Courage), Nigimitama (Friendship), Kushimitama (Wisdom) and Sakimitama (Love). The souls could make a person very powerful which was why she was so.
One day, a human who loved her was jealous, just like Onigumo. He made demons eat his soul so that they could all join together. But the number of demons were so much that the human lost his love and the demons were able to fight Midoriko without any struggle. Because there were so many of them joined together, with so much impurity (bad powers), even with Midoriko's own power of goodness and purity, they could easily win over Midoriko. But when they were about to eat her, she tore out her own 4 pure (good) souls and joined it with the demon's bad soul. This made the demons die and made the Shikon no Tama. But Midoriko also died because of this, together with the demons.
There was a statue of her in a cave in Sango's village where Shako, Sango's grandfather found the Shikon no Tama for the first time and gave it to Kikyo to look after.
Kirara is Sango's pet demon. She was also Shako's pet. In the anime, Kirara is also known to be Midoriko's pet. Kirara was not Midoriko's pet in the manga.
Onigumo.
Onigumo is a human who was once a thief. He got beaten and was nearly killed when Kikyo came to save him in a cave. This is how Onigumo comes to love Kikyo, but he is soon jealous. He is the maker of Naraku and because his soul is still inside Naraku, Naraku can not kill Kikyo with the love for her by Onigumo still inside him. Naraku doesn't want to love Kikyo, so he tries to tear onigumo apart. Naraku's trying is shown by Musou, his detachment, who failed.
But he finally manges it by tearing his heart, as a little child called Akago and nearly kills her with tentacles, but Kikyo gets help from the soils from Onigumo's cave, where he once used to get treated by Kikyo.
Shako.
Shako is Sango's grandfather who used to own Kirara. He could also use Hiraikotsu, which is given to Sango when she is born. He found the Shikon no Tama messed up with impureness (badness) because of the bad Mistress Centipede having it. Shako kills Mistress Centipede with his boomerang and puts her bones into the Bone-eater's well, where bones of dead demons are put inside. This is why Mistress Centipede became alive from her bones and grabbed Kagome inside the well. Shako then gives the jewel to Kikyo, because her goodness will not mess up the jewel any more. But that is why Kikyo has to be a priestess forever, because she has to protect the jewel forever. She didn't want to stay being a priestess and wanted to be normal. This is why she agreed to meet Inuyasha and give the jewel to him.
Shako finds the jewel on front of Midoriko's cave, where there is a barrier. He finds out that only people who has goodness in their hearts and feel sorry for dead soldiers can go inside the cave.
Thunder Brothers.
The Thunder Brothers are two brothers, called Hiten and Manten. They killed Shippo's father to get a piece of the jewel shard. They made themselves a sash with the father's hide(a belt to remember killing the father). Shippo tries to get revenge on them by getting more power from the Shikon no tama, and tries to steals it from Inuyasha and Kagome, but soon works together with them to kill the Thunder Brothers. Then Inuyasha eats the Thunder Brother's blood thinking it's watermelon.
