List of Christian denominations (or Denominations self-identified as Christian) ordered by historical and doctrinal relationships. (See also: Christianity; Christian denominations).
Some groups are large (e.g. Catholics, Lutherans, Anglicans or Baptists) while others are just a few small churches, and in most cases the relative size is not evident in this list.
This is not a complete list, but it tries to provide a comprehensible overview of the diversity that exists among denominations of Christianity. Many links point to not yet existent articles. There are approximately 300 branches listed here.
Eastern Churches.
Note: nearly all the Churches of this group name themselves as Orthodox Catholic, though this can be confusing with the Catholic (non Orthodox) Churches (which see).
Assyrian Church of the East.
The Assyrian Church of the East is said to have been formed by St Thomas. The Church did not accept the Council of Ephesus (AD 431). It is incorrectly referred to as Nestorianism; Assyrian Orthodox do not consider themselves Nestorians, and recent Christological agreements with the Catholic and Orthodox churches have resolved this debate permanently, clearing the way for union.
Oriental Orthodoxy.
Oriental Orthodoxy was formed in the fifth century by Christians who did not accept the Council of Chalcedon (AD 451). It is historically related to Eutychian Monophysitism, and other denominations typically call these churches Monophysite, but Oriental Orthodox reject this description, calling themselves Miaphysite.
The Roman Catholic Church: Churches in communion with the Bishop of Rome.
Latin Rite
The Latin Rite, is the largest and most familiar of the 23 Rites that make up The Roman Catholic Church.
Eastern Catholic Church
All of the following are to be particular churches of the Roman Catholic Church. They are part of the Catholic Church in communion with the Pope and have no doctrinal differences and are therefore different rites within the Catholic Church
Anglicanism.
The Anglican Church always existed in a union with Rome but left the Roman Church during the English Reformation. Along with the Roman, Orthodox, Coptic, Mar Thoma, and Syrian Churches, Anglicanism constitutes another branch of the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church.
Spiritual Baptists.
Note: The Spiritual Baptist Archdiocese of New York, Inc has congregationalist affiliations for the purpose of cooperation, in which each local church is governmentally independent.
Oneness Pentecostalism.
Note: Genealogically, Oneness Pentecostalism can be grouped with other Pentecostals, but doctrinally, it is a non-trinitarian denomination.
Religious Society of Friends (Quakers).
Note: Although, historically speaking, the Religious Society of Friends can be listed as a Protestant denomination, this is sometimes contested and many Quakers today consider their faith to be a distinct, non-Protestant form of Christianity, with no compulsory beliefs or creeds. Some Quakers are "post-Christian" and some non-theists.
Restorationism.
Note: What these denominations have in common is the claim that they restore the practice and/or faith of primitive Christianity in the modern era. Otherwise their beliefs are quite distinct. Some sects consider themselves Protestant, while some of the demoninations listed under Nontrinitarianism can also be listed as Restorationist. In the study of the history of Christianity, Restorationist churches traditionally are classed as Protestant; however, their claims of restoring primitive Christianity often mean that they date their establishment to the time of Jesus and thus resist being classified in this manner. Additionally, some of the groups — particularly within the Stone-Campbell movement — reject the idea of a denominational authority or structure and do not consider themselves to be denominations.
Other websites.
History, profiles and comparison charts of major Christian denominations.
