The thought of liberal art is received from the classical antiquity. It relates to its culture for "free men" as opposed to the "servil arts" (i.e. arts which work for another). The word liberal arts (in Latin "artes liberales") stood for the studies which as purpose were to give rather general knowledges and intellectual skills than professional skills suitable for one's job.
During the Middle Ages, the liberal arts made do with the central part of the plan of studies of the universities. Alcuin, intellectual adviser of Charlemagne, had adopted them as base of the school reform carrying to end during the period of the Carolingian Renaissance. In the medieval theories of education the "quadrivium" followed the preparatory work of the "trivium". Although the scheme of "trivium" and "quadrivium" are known sometimes as "classical education", is corresponding mainly with a development medieval that comes to the centuries 12th and 13th.
The area and range of the liberal arts evolved in the time. In the beginning they are referred to the education of the elites in the classical works. Boethius, the "last romano, the first scholastic", in an almost hopeless purpose of transmitting the classical civilization to the new men of noble rank of Italy, remains in the kingdom of the ostrogoths in order to try teach them the basic principles of the "quadrivium". Since 6th century to the latter times, the medieval system of academic studies would be corresponding with the double scheme of the contents of the "trivium" and "quadrivium" but with the appearance of the Humanities and of the science in the age of the Enlightenment, the meaning of "liberal arts" is extended until to include both. Still, specific activities as the agriculture, the business, the engineering, the pedagogy, the medicine or the pharmacy are excluded from the liberal arts.
In the Modern Age (?), the idea, used more widely as liberal professions includes the professional task that requires education at university, mainly the law and the medicine.
