This article lists the characters in the film trilogy Pirates of the Caribbean.
Elizabeth Swann.
Elizabeth Swann is the daughter of Weatherby Swann, governor of Port Royal. She was played by Keira Knightley.
She becomes James Norrington's fiance after he proposes to her. She only accepts his marriage proposal so he will save Will Turner, the man she loves. After Will is rescued, the marriage is called off. She marries Will Turner instead and has a son named William Turner Jr.
Jack Sparrow.
Jack Sparrow, known to many people as Captain Jack Sparrow, is a pirate. He is played by Johnny Depp.
Jack Sparrow was captain of the black-sailed ship called the "Black Pearl". However, after a mutiny led by his first mate Hector Barbossa, he was marooned on an island with nothing but a gun holding one bullet. However, he survived for three days on the island. There were many rumors about how he escaped the island, many of them glorifying Sparrow. In reality, Sparrow had discovered a smuggler's cache of rum and waited for the smugglers to come rescue him.
He assembles a crew to help him re-claim the "Black Pearl". After the curse is lifted from the crew of the "Black Pearl", he kills Barbossa using the gun he was left with when he was marooned. He re-claims his position as captain of the "Black Pearl".
Hector Barbossa.
Captain Hector Barbossa, commonly called Barbossa, is a pirate. He is played by actor Geoffrey Rush.
Barbossa was Jack Sparrow's first mate. He led the mutiny against Sparrow, and became captain of the "Black Pearl". He and his crew became cursed after stealing a chest of cursed Aztec gold. Just as the curse is lifted, Jack Sparrow shoots Barbossa (using the bullet from the gun left with him when he was marooned). This shot kills Barbossa. However, he is brought back to life by Tia Dalma to rescue Jack Sparrow from Davy Jones' Locker.
Will Turner.
William "Will" Turner is a blacksmith who lives in Port Royal. He was played by Orlando Bloom.
After being found in the wreckage of a ship at sea, Will Turner was taken aboard a ship traveling to Port Royal. There, he became a blacksmith's apprentice. He falls in love with Elizabeth Swann, the governor's daughter, and marries her. However, after killing Davy Jones, he became captain of the "Flying Dutchman", which allows him to make port only once per ten years.
James Norrington.
James Norrington is a British Royal Navy Officer. He was played by Jack Davenport.
James Norrington is a commodore in the Royal Navy. He proposes to Elizabeth Swann, however, she marries Will Turner instead.
After Jack Sparrow escapes hanging on the gallows, Norrington gives Sparrow a day's head start, effectively letting him escape. This causes him to lose his commission and position in the Royal Navy. He goes to Tortuga, a privateer port where many pirates and criminals live. However, he redeems himself by stealing the heart of Davy Jones and giving it to Lord Beckett. However, he regrets this decision as Beckett begins executing all pirates.
James Norrington dies on board the "Flying Dutchman" after helping Elizabeth escape. He is then impaled by Bill Turner, Will Turner's father.
Lord Cutler Beckett.
Lord Cutler Beckett is a ruthless Lord of the East India Trading Company. He is played Tom Hollander.
After gaining the heart of Davy Jones from James Norrington, Beckett uses it to control Davy Jones. He orders the mass execution of all pirates, even women and children.
He is killed aboard the ship the "Endeavor". He loses his control of Davy Jones after Will Turner stabs his heart and becomes the captain of the "Flying Dutchman". The "Endeavor" is destroyed by the "Black Pearl" and the "Flying Dutchman", killing all those aboard, including Beckett.
Tia Dalma.
Tia Dalma is the human form of the goddess Calypso. She is played by Naomie Harris.
Little is known about Tia Dalma. She once had a relationship with Jack Sparrow when they were "inseparable". It was in this time when she gave Sparrow his compass. She was Davy Jones' lover at one point. She was the one who turned him into a monster, after he cut his heart out for her.
She is revealed to be the nymph Calypso, bound to human form by the Brethren Court.
Davy Jones.
Davy Jones is captain of the "Flying Dutchman". He is voiced by Bill Nighy.
Davy Jones turned into a monster after his relationship with Tia Dalma went bad. He is the captain of the "Flying Dutchman", a ship crewed by those offered a second chance at life for a hundred years. Their job is to ferry souls to the afterlife. However, Davy Jones uses the crew for his own purposes. This has caused him and the crew to transform into monsters resembling sea life.
Davy Jones was killed by Will Turner aboard the "Flying Dutchman".
Sao Feng.
Sao Feng is a Pirate Lord of the Brethren Court. He is played by Chow Yun-Fat.
Sao Feng is the pirate lord of the South China Sea. He is known for betraying anyone, even his friends, to get on the winning side. He says this is "just good business". He often uses a dao as his weapon of choice.
Joshamee Gibbs.
Joshamee Gibbs, known as Mr. Gibbs, is a pirate. He is played by Kevin McNally.
Mr. Gibbs is right hand man to Jack Sparrow. He helps Jack Sparrow assemble a crew to go after the "Black Pearl". He is very superstitious. Not much is known about his past, aside from the fact he had served in the Royal Navy at one point.
Weatherby Swann.
Weatherby Swann is the governor of Port Royal, and is father to Elizabeth Swann. He is played by Jonathan Pryce.
Governor Swann wanted Elizabeth to marry James Norrington. However, he did not mind when she chose Will Turner instead, because he wanted her to be happy.
He was assassinated by an employee of the East India Trading Company under Beckett's orders.
Pintel and Ragetti.
Pintel and Ragetti are pirates. Pintel is played by Lee Arenburg, and Ragetti is played by Mackenzie Crook.
Pintel and Ragetti were part of the crew on the "Black Pearl". They took part in the mutiny led by Barbossa, and each became immortal after taking part of the cursed chest of Aztec gold. Ragetti has a wooden eye, which is in fact Barbossa's Piece of Eight. They often are comic relief in the films.
Bootstrap Bill Turner.
Bill Turner, often called Bootstrap, is a pirate. He died, but took a second chance at life to become part of the crew on the "Flying Dutchman". He is played by Stellan Skarsgård.
Bootstrap is Will Turner's father. He was part of the crew of the "Black Pearl" with Jack Sparrow as captain, but he did not take part in the mutiny. He was killed by Barbossa because of this. Instead of choosing death, however, he becomes part of the crew on the "Flying Dutchman" with Davy Jones.
The Kraken.
The Kraken is a fictional sea monster. It is based on the mythical beast in mythology. It is a sea monster that does the bidding of Davy Jones. When summoned by him, it arises from the ocean. Often Davy Jones tells it to destroy ships that he believes threaten or annoy him. The Kraken kills Jack Sparrow and destroys the "Black Pearl".
Captain Teague.
Captain Teague is pirate, and is Keeper of the Code for the Brethren Court. He is played by Keith Richards.
Teague is Jack Sparrow's father. He is the former Pirate Lord of Madagascar, but he resigned to become Keeper of the Code.
Anamaria.
Anamaria is a female pirate. She is played by Zoë Saldaña.
Not much is known about her, other than her ship was stolen by Jack Sparrow at one point. She becomes part of Jack Sparrow's crew in helping him find the "Black Pearl".
Lieutenant Gillette.
Lieutenant Gillette is a British Royal Navy officer. He is played by Damian O'Hare.
Gillette is James Norrington's Flag-Lieutenant. He survives the battle on the "HMS Dauntless".
Lieutenant Groves.
Lieutenant Groves is a British Royal Navy Officer. He is played by Greg Ellis.
Groves is a British Royal Navy Officer. He served under the command of James Norrington. He also serves as Beckett's second-in-command aboard the "Dauntless" when it is destroyed by the "Flying Dutchman" and the "Black Pearl". When Beckett gives no commands for the crew, he orders them to abandon ship.
Mercer.
Mercer is an employee of the East India Trading Company. He is played by David Schofield.
Mercer is Beckett's assistant. Beckett often uses Mercer to carry out his "dirty" work, such as assassination and spying.
Giselle and Scarlett.
Giselle and Scarlett are prostitutes from Tortuga. Giselle is played by Vanessa Branch. Scarlett is played by Lauren Mahler.
Both women often flirt with Jack Sparrow. They both also often slap him for lying to them.
