Hindus believe in lots of female gods. As a group, these are called Hindu goddesses'". Each goddess of the Hindus has her own story and history. They all look different too. Some goddesses can change how they look, so they have two or three different images. Some learned persons think that all Hindu goddesses are different forms of a single big or supreme goddess. Some learned persons also think that worship of goddesses by Hindus shows their respect for female gender.
Indus Valley.
The Indus Valley Civilization was an old civilization of Ancient India. It lasted from 3000 to 1500BC. Archeologists found some female figures at some places of this civilization. Some persons believe that these figures show the worship of goddess at that time. Some learned persons think that people of that time worshipped a mother goddess. This was similar to worship of a mother goddess in the Mediterranean.
Vedic period.
The Vedic period or Vedic civilization of India was a very old civilization. Vedas tell about a number of goddesses. Some of the names of goddesses are Ushas, Prithivi, Aditi, Saraswati, Vac, Nirrti, Ratri. Beside them, some more names of goddesses are there like Puramdhi, Parendi, Raka, Dhisana. Some more names are like Ila, Bharati, Mahi, and Hotra.
Some important goddesses of Hindus are Lakshmi, Parvati, Sita, Radha, Durga, Kali, Mahadevi, Matrakas, Tara, Chhinnamasta, Mahavidyas, and many more. Some goddesses are also connected with places and rivers.
Sri Lakshmi.
food, royal power, universal sovereignty, noble rank, power, holy luster, kingdom, fortune, bounteousness, and beauty.
Parvati.
In Sanskrit language, Parvati means a daughter of the mountains, the Himalayas. Goddess Parvati is the wife of Shiva, one of the three main gods of the Hindus. If she is shown seated by the side of Shiva, she has two arms. If she comes alone, she has four arms. She rides on a tiger or a lion.
Saraswati.
Saraswati is the goddess of speech and learning. Vedas tells about her. Her image shows that she has four arms. In her hands, she holds a book, a rosary, a pot of water, and a lute.
In ancient time there was also a river named Saraswati River. The river dried up long ago. This river is also considered a goddess.
Sita.
Sita is one of the most popular goddesses of Hindus. Hindus of north India especially worship her. She is an avatar of Lakshmi. She was married to Rama, an avatar of Vishnu. Hindu scriptures say that Vishnu and Laxmi are husband and wife.
Radha.
The word Radha means riches and success. Her name comes with the name of Krishna, another avatar of Vishnu. Some Hindu scriptures describe her as a form or avatar of goddess Lakshmi.
Durga.
Durga is one of the most powerful goddesses of Hindus. Hindu scriptures say that Durga came to kill the asuras, that is, the demons. Male gods had failed to control asuras and she was created. She had the powers of all the male gods combined.
Kali.
Kali is one of the main goddesses of Hindus. She is a very powerful goddess. Sometimes she is also called Chandi. Durga and Kali together killed many asuras (demons) who used to disturb human beings.
