Lewis Hamilton was born on 7 January 1985. He is a British Formula One driver.
His karting career began in 1993 and at the age of ten, when he approached Ron Dennis for a signature and told him that one day he would like to race in his cars. Dennis got his details and phoned him a few years later when he began winning championships.
At the age of thirteen, he was signed on for a driver development programme by McLaren with an option of a future F1 drive with the team.
Car racing career.
Lewis has won several smaller championships, but he has driven in Formula One since 2007.
2007.
In 2007 he made his F1 appearance at the Australian Grand Prix and finished 3rd after running most of the race in 2nd place and even leading a few laps. In the Malaysian Grand Prix he followed it up with a 2nd place. He finished 2nd again in Bahrain, Spain and Monaco although he was told to settle for 2nd in Monaco after showing much speed but risking an accident on the street course.
He would score his maiden pole position in the Canadian Grand Prix, which he would dominate to win from Nick Heidfeld and Alex Wurz. He followed it up with another win from pole in the United States Grand Prix a week later. In the French Grand Prix he finished 3rd behind a Ferrari 1-2 and would score another pole in the British Grand Prix althouh he faded to a distant 3rd in the race.
In a torrential rainstorm in the European Grand Prix he aquaplaned off the track and was thought to have retired but he kept the engine running and was lifted out of the sand with a crane. The race was stopped to clean up the wreckage of another 5 cars that have also aquaplaned and on the restart he was a lap behind. He risked pitting for slicks on a damp track with a few puddles and he went off the track several times. He was on course for 8th until another late rainshower limited his progress and he ended up finishing in 9th, only a second behind Heikki Kovaleinnen. In Hungary he inherited pole after he was blocked by Fernando Alonso in qualifying, resulting in Alonso being demoted from pole to 6th on the grid. Hamilton resisted pressure from Raikkönen to win his 3rd career Grand Prix. In Turkey he was on course for 3rd until a late race puncture dropped him to 5th. He finished 2nd in Italy followed by a 4th in Belgium.
He took his 5th career pole in the Japanese Grand Prix and survived a collision with Robert Kubica to win the race from Heikki Kovaleinnen and Kimi Raikkönen. He took his 6th pole in China and led until he got a puncture and lost the lead to Kimi Raikkönen. On his way into the pits he spun into the gravel and got his first retirement in Formula One. He needed 2nd place in Brazil to secure the championship and dropped from 2nd on the grid to 4th after the first turns. He then went wide and dropped to 8th, although still within reach of his main rival, Fernando Alonso. On lap 6 he suffered a gearbox glitch from which he recovered from, albeit in last place and over a minute behind the leaders. He would storm through the pack to 7th place and lose the championship by 1 point to Kimi Raikkönen.
2008.
He won the Australian Grand Prix (in which only 6 cars finished) from pole. He would start in 9th in Malaysia after getting a 5 place grid penalty for impeding in qualifying. He was running in 3rd when he was heavily delayed in the pits, he would recover to finish 5th. In Bahrain he started 3rd but made a bad start and dropped to 12th. A lap later he lost his front wing when he slammed into the back of Fernando Alonso. In Spain he drove a good race to 3rd followed by a great drive to 2nd, finishing 4 seconds behind Massa with a 3 stop strategy to Massa's 2 stops. In Monaco he qualified 3rd and in a wet race he ran 2nd early on. On lap 6 he had a puncture after hitting a wall and rejoined in 4th after pitting for fuel and a new tyre. While using only 80% of his fuel in the wet he ended up leading the race by 38 seconds after the 2nd round of pitstops and he eventually won the race by 3 seconds from Robert Kubica after a late safety car period. He took pole in Canada but crashed into Kimi Raikkönen in the pitlane. In France he started 13th due to a penalty for the pit lane crash in Canada and was up to 8th when he got a penalty for cutting a chicane. He recovered to finish 10th. He scored pole position in the British Grand Prix and won the race.
