Lalon Shah Bridge, the second longest bridge of the country, has opened to traffic. Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia inaugurated the bridge at a ceremony held at Paksey today. With the opening of this bridge direct road link between north-western and south-western region of the country, which was divided by the river Padma, has been established.
The 1.8 K.M long bridge has been constructed parallel to historic Hardinge Railway Bridge over the river Padma with the financial assistance from Japan. To construct the bridge, the Government of Japan through JBIC extended soft ODA Yen loan to Bangladesh in two phases. The first phase loan agreement was signed between Bangladesh and Japan on July 01, 1997 while the second phase loan agreement on March 31, 2001. The total cost of the bridge is US $ 184 million of which JBIC contributed US $ 141 million, which is about 80% of the total cost.
On this occasion, an inauguration ceremony was held at the bridge site at Paksey on May 18, 2004. Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia was the Chief Guest while Ambassador of Japan to Bangladesh H.E. Mr. Matsushiro Horiguchi spoke as the special guest. Mr. Ryutaro Koga, Deputy Director General of JBIC Tokyo read out the message from JBIC Governor Mr. Kyosuke Shinozawa in the ceremony. Mr. Tsutomu Uchida, Chief Representative of JBIC Dhaka was present, among others, in the function.
"I would like to convey my heartfelt appreciation to all the people for their contribution to implementing the project. I sincerely hope that this multi-million-Taka project, which is a national asset, will be used and maintained for the overall betterment of the common people of Bangladesh. We strongly hope that the Lalon Shah Bridge will long be remembered as an important symbol of eternal friendship between our two countries," H.E. Mr. Matsushiro Horiguchi, Ambassador of Japan, said at the inauguration ceremony.
“The completion of Lalon Shah Bridge will not only strengthen the economical, cultural and social unity of the Bangladeshi people, who are divided by major rivers, but also facilitate trade with India and Nepal. Especially, as concerns trade with inland Nepal, it is expected that better access to Mongla Port will lead to the establishment of an international transportation system. Economic ties between Bangladesh and Nepal will then be further strengthened” says Mr. Shinozawa, JBIC Governor. “ JBIC will continue to support the Government of Bangladesh 's efforts through the financing of economic infrastructure projects or assistance in structural reforms to achieve the country's national objective of poverty alleviation through accelerated economic growth” the message continued.
The bridge will have an immense socio-economic impact on Bangladesh by providing a fixed road link with west and southwest Bangladesh. Improved communication through free movement of goods and passengers both within Bangladesh and from neighboring countries like India and Nepal will be facilitated greatly. The bridge is to promote easier access to Mongla Port to expedite enhanced cargo handling.
It is mention worthy that Lalon Shah Bridge enjoys some of the records such as the deepest concrete piles in the world and the longest continuous segmental deck in the world, erected by using the balanced cantilever technique. The earthquake protection devices are some of the largest in the world as are the bridge bearings and expansion joints.
