A mobile phone (also known as a wireless phone, cell phone, or cellular telephone) is a little portable radio telephone.
The mobile phone can be used to communicate over long distances without wires. It works by communicating with a nearby base station (which is called a "cell") which connects it to the main phone network. As the mobile phone moves around, if the mobile phone gets too far away from the cell it is connected to, that cell sends a message to another cell to tell the new cell to take over the call. This is called a "hand off," and the call continues with the new cell the phone is connected to. The hand-off is done so well and carefully that the user will usually never even know that the call was transferred to another cell.
Before cell phones became almost universal, the only way you could contact people when you were in public was either to use a Pay Phone, or a very expensive mobile telephone (price equivalent in the 1950s to about US$1000 to US $3000, today), and the rates then were as high as $1 a minute. They also needed so much power that you had to have them in an automobile to use them. A mobile telephone used a single frequency and did not share it. Thus for a given region - say New York City - there might only be the capacity for 30 or 40 simultaneous conversations in the entire city.
Later someone got the idea for radio telephones to have the base station that talks to all of the phones use less power, thus more base stations could be used, allowing more phones in an area. Also, for cellular phones, a lot more frequencies became available, plus phones could change what frequency they used when they were operating (which means you weren't tied to your local telephone company's network), and the capacity to make a base station's power reduced so that more base stations could be added in crowded areas, meant that the network could handle more simultaneous users. A lot more. Current Cell networks are designed with 666 channels broken into six "cells" so that in any specific cell, only 111 of these channels are used. As a phone moves, the base station tells it which of the six cell groups it will move to and which of the 111 channels in that cell to use. Think of a honeycomb, where each cell faces six others, and thus the cell concept can provide much more service than the old mobile telephone system.
Since a cell phone essentially allows the person to be anywhere, and to move around while calling, they became extremely popular for business people. The high amount of usage caused prices to drop, thus making them affordable for almost anyone. Monthly plans giving boatloads of minutes are available for rates as low as US$30 or $40 a month. Prepaid service has dropped the price to have a cell phone to less than $100 a year, with as much as a couple hours of use a year included in the price. In Israel, the price of service is so low - circa 2c a minute or less - that soldiers in the military - which is almost everyone due to universal conscription - have been told to leave their cell phones home, lest enemies use the phones to target them.
Cell phones have become so inexpensive to have that they have basically killed off payphones and phone booths except for extremely high-traffic areas.
History.
People have wanted to make mobile phones for a long time, but it took until the late 20th century for technology to make them possible.
Although Dr. Martin Cooper from Motorola made the first call using a mobile phone in 1973, this was not on a cellular mobile phone network as we use today.
The first mobile phone networks were created in the late 1970s in Japan. Now almost all urban areas, and many country areas, are covered by mobile phone networks.
The mobile phone was created in Germany by Dennis Petro Mulakuliano Vogel.
Technology.
A cell phone has combined two technologies: telephone (invented by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876) and radio (invention of Nikola Tesla in the 1880s).
Cell phones work as two-way radios. They send electromagnetic microwaves from base station to base station. The waves are sent through antennas. This is called wireless communication.
Most of the older cell phones use analog networks. All modern phones use digital networks.
Digital networks are also known as second generation, or 2G, technologies. They differ either by technology or by speed. The most used digital network is GSM (Global System for Mobile communication). It is used mainly in Europe and Asia, while CDMA (Code-Division Multiple Access) networks are mainly used in North America. Other countries like Japan have different 2G technologies.
The radio waves that the mobile phone networks use are split into different frequencies. The frequency is measured in Hz. Low frequencies offer good connection. Higher frequencies can send the signal further. Four main frequencies are used around the world: 850, 900, 1800 and 1900 MHz. Europe uses 900 and 1800 MHz and North America uses 850 and 1900 MHz.
Today there are mobile phones that work on two, three or four frequencies. The most advanced phones work on all frequencies. They are called 'world' phones and can be used everywhere.
How mobile phones work.
When a mobile phone is switched on, it connects to the nearest mobile phone base station. Electronics in the base station check that the phone is allowed to use the network. The base station covers what is called a cell and a phone can move between different cells, but will only ever communicate with one cell at a time. This is why mobile communications are sometimes called cellular communications.
Once connected to a cell, the mobile phone can make calls. As the network knows that the phone is connected to that particular cell, it can also route calls to the mobile phone. Sometimes the connection to the cell is lost, for example when using the subway. This means the phone cannot make or receive calls until the connection is made again.
Networks and payment.
The network is the company that provides the phone service. In most areas there will be more than one mobile network. Customers choose networks based on how well the different networks work in their area, or by price.
Digital mobile phones need a separate microchip, called a Subscriber Identity Module or SIM, to work. The SIM has information like the phone number and payment account and this is needed to make or receive calls. The SIM may be supplied by the same company as the phone, or a different one. Sometimes you can change the network by using a SIM from another network, but some companies do not want this to happen and they lock the phone so that you have to use their SIM.
3G.
The latest phones are called 3G phones. 3G stands for "3rd G'"eneration". These can send and receive data a lot faster so they can be used for email and web browsing. Older phones were not very good at this as they were very slow.
Modern 3G phones are just like small computers and are very different from mobile phones of a just a few years ago.
