A mutant is a type of fictional character in a fictional universe created by Marvel Comics. In this world, mutants can be either heroes or villains. A mutant is someone who has different DNA than its parents. These mutations often lead to superpowers. They may also cause physical changes such as wings, blue skin, or a tail.
Mutants were created in the Marvel Universe in the 1960s with the comic book "The X-Men". It was a way for them to tell stories that dealt with racism. Racism, hatred and fear of mutants are an important part of their history. Two main teams of mutants have been around since the 1960's: The X-Men (heroes) and the Brotherhood of Mutants (villains).
Overview.
Sometime a human is born with an DNA change. This "x-gene" is passed to their children. This genetic change may not create any noticeable difference. It could pass for generations without anyone knowing about it.
In many ways, it is wrong to call these superhumans mutants. The "x-gene" was passed to them from their parents. They are not mutated humans. They are a different type of humans: "Homo Sapiens Superior" or just "Homo Superior".
Classification.
Marvel's mutants are classified by their level of power.
Mutants as a Metaphor for Racism.
The Xmen created in the 1960s during a time of civil unrest in the United States. The characters allowed the writer to write stories that showed racism and bigotry without singling out a specific minority.
By classifying Mutants as they did, they also created different aspects of racism. Some mutants are easily recognized by how they look (similar to African-Americans). Some have a few physical characteristics that can make them get notices (Similar to Jews). Other mutants blend in so well that it nearly impossible to tell they are a mutant unless they use their powers (Similar to homosexuals)
In the Marvel universe normal people often hate and fear mutants. This is because they think mutants may make normal humans extinct. They fear what they do not understand. They are jealous of them having superpowers. Bigotry and xenophobia are also reasons for hatred of mutants. In the Marvel universe, anti-mutant feeling has led to the separation of mutants from society. It has led to mob violence and government sponsored tries to fight mutants.
