Masochism is a medical condition where people can derive pleasure from being humiliated or hurt by other people. Often, the arousal has a sexual nature. Sadism may be similar, but in the case of sadism, the person is sexually aroused from hurting or humiliating other people.
The first person to use the term masochism in a scientific way was Richard von Krafft-Ebing, a German psychiatrist. He named it after Leopold von Sacher-Masoch (1836-1895) who had written books where he described women deriving pleasure from being humiliated or hurt.
Originally, sadism and masochism were seen as a problem with sexual preference. This is no longer the case though, BDSM is clearly not classified that way.
Different forms of Masochism.
Masochism can lead to wounds of different types, for example cuts, bruises, broken bones, strains, traumatic brain injury or other traumas. In some cases, people have died from masochistic practices.
No sexual motivation.
Masochists want to be humiliated or hurt, as they can derive pleasure from this. In some cases patients actively seek situations where this is the case. Sometimes compensating actions that are not sexual in nature are seen as masochist, for example hurting oneself. Sometimes psychic abnormalities like nail-biting or pulling ones own hair out can also be classified that way. Often, these actions are motivated because the patient feels like they are under high pressure to achieve something. In many cases the causes for these behaviour lie deeper, though. They may be rooted in the personality of the patient.
Sexual motivation.
Patients can only be sexually satisfied if they are humiliated or they feel pain. Sometimes the sex parner is replaced by an anonymous or fictitious one. Self-mutilation (hurting oneself) also happens in this case, though not as a compensatory action, but rather as part of sexual intercourse or foreplay.
This kind has sexual motives. Exerting power or being violent to other people or animals often is a source of sexual arousal. It can replace foreplay in some cases.
"Compensatory masochism" is when a masochist action completely replaces sex.
Treating masochism.
Treating masochism is difficult, but it looks like psychotherapy can help in certain cases.
