The Ministry of the Interior of Germany is a ministry of the federal government.It is based in a brand new building in the Moabit area of Berlin-Mitte. The BMI has a second office in Bonn. It is not the same as the United States Department of the Interior.
The ministry handles affairs about security and police, so it is more like the British Home Office.
Each state also has a ministry of the interior.
Responsibility.
The Federal Ministry of the Interior is responsible for the security inside Germany, the protection of the constitution, the public service, the organisation of the public administration, the civil defence, information technology and sports. The BMI also buys motor vehicles for the federal government, and has its own motor vehicle registration office.
Health and Safety Standards.
The various State laws about health and safety do not apply to the Federal Government. Instead the BMI is the with health and safe authoirty for all federal bodies. It keeps the federal accident reigster.
The European Union sometimes complains that this is wrong. It says that the Federal health and safety authority should be independent.
Agencies under the authority of the BMI.
Bundesausgleichsamt (BAA) Federal Equalization of Burdens Office (helping small states which need to spend a lot of money for some jobs)
Bundesamt für Migration und Flüchtlinge Federal Office of Migration and Refugees (BAMF)
Bundesakademie für öffentliche Verwaltung Federal Academy for Public Administration (BAköV)
Bundesbeauftragter für den Datenschutz und die Informationsfreiheit Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (BfD)
Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (BfV)
Bundespolizei Federal Police (BPol) (formerly: "Bundesgrenzschutz Federal Border Guard" (BGS))
Bundesinstitut für Bevölkerungsforschung Federal Institute for Population Research (BIB)
Bundesinstitut für Sportwissenschaft Federal Institute for Sports Science BISp)
Bundeskriminalamt Federal Criminal Police Office (BKA)
Bundesamt für Kartographie und Geodäsie Federal Office of Cartography and Geodesy (BKG)
Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung Federal Office for Civic Education (bpb)
Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik Federal Office of Information Technology Security (BSI)
Bundesverwaltungsamt Federal Administration Office (BVA)
Bundesamt für Bevölkerungsschutz und Katastrophenhilfe Federal Office of Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance (BBK)
Schutzkommission beim Bundesminister des Innern Security Commission of the Federal Minister of the Interior
Fachhochschule des Bundes für öffentliche Verwaltung Federal College for Public Administration (FH bund)
Koordinierungs- und Beratungsstelle der Bundesregierung für Informationstechnik in der Bundesverwaltung Coordination and Advice Centre for Information Technology in the Federal Government (KBSt)
Statistisches Bundesamt Federal Statistical Office (destatis)
Technisches Hilfswerk Emergency relief organisation (THW)
Unabhängige Kommission zur Überprüfung des Vermögens der Parteien und Massenorganisationen der DDR Independent Commission for Checking the Property of the Parties and Mass Organisations of the DDR (UKPV)|
Vertreter des Bundesinteresses beim Bundesverwaltungsgericht Federal Interests Representative at the Federal Administrative Court (VBI)
Beauftragter der Bundesregierung für Aussiedlerfragen und nationale Minderheiten Federal Ombudsman for Resettled Persons and National Minorities
Bundesanstalt für den Digitalfunk der Behörden und Organisationen mit Sicherheitsaufgaben Federal Agency for Digital Radio of Security Authorities and Organizations(BDBOS.)
