A moose ("Alces alces") (called elk in Europe) is a mammal of the deer family.
A male moose is called a "bull", a female moose is called a "cow", and a young moose is called a "calf". A group of moose is called a "herd".
The plural of moose is "moose" (such as: There was one "moose" in the forest / There were two "moose" in the forest.).
Appearance.
Moose are about 3 meters long and about 2 meters / 6.5 feet tall. Males usually weigh about 500 kilograms / 1,100 pounds, and females weigh about 400 kilograms / 880 pounds.
The moose has a fur coat colored between reddish-brown and blackish-brown. In winter, their fur becomes a grayish color. Moose have a flap of skin hanging from their throats, which is called a "bell". Male moose have large antlers. These antlers fall off before winter. In the spring the antlers grow back again. Female moose do not have antlers.
Range.
The moose lives across North America to northern Europe to Siberia. In Europe they live in Finland, Sweden, Norway and the Baltic countries.(Estonia,Latvia and Lithuania). In north America they live in Canada, Alaska, and little bit USA. In 2008 they have been re-introduced to Scottish Highlands from Scandinavia.
Habitat.
Moose live in northern Europe, Asia, and in North America. Moose usually live in areas with lakes and swamps.
Life.
Moose are active during the day. They live alone, but in winter they sometimes form small groups. Moose eat grass, leaves, twigs, willow, birch and maple shoots and water plants.
After a pregnancy of 8 months, the female gives birth to 1 or 2 babies. Females begin to have babies when they are 2 or 3 years old. Young moose stay with their mother for a year; after one year they leave and live alone. Moose usually become 15 years old, but they can become up to 27 years old. A mother moose will aggressively protect her young. Their enemies are bears and wolves, who hunt moose calves.
Moose and humans.
Moose have been hunted by humans for a very long time, since the Stone Age.
Because of their dark coloured fur, Moose are sometimes hit by cars since they are hard to see when they are crossing roads at night. In some countries like Finland and Sweden they have a moose sign and the have fences around motorways.
