Minerals are substances that are formed naturally in the Earth. Minerals must be solid, inorganic, have a crystal structure, and happen naturally (without human interference). The study of minerals is called mineralogy.
A mineral is a solid and has a crystal structure. It also has a placed chemical composition.
A mineral can be a hard object chemical element or in most cases a solid compound. There are over 4,000 types of known minerals. Two common minerals are quartz and feldspar.
Characteristics of minerals.
People use minerals for many everyday purposes. Every time people turn on a microwave oven or a TV minerals are being used. The copper in the wires that carry electricity to the object is a mineral. Table salt or halite, is another mineral that people use in their everyday life. A mineral is a substance that
A rock has only two of the characteristics minerals have–it is a solid and it forms naturally. A rock usually contains two or more types of minerals. Two samples of the same type of rock may have different kinds of minerals in them. Minerals, however, are always made up of the same materials in the same proportions. A ruby is a mineral. Therefore, a ruby found in India has the same makeup as a ruby found in Australia. Indeed rocks are not the same as minerals.
Formed in Nature.
Minerals are formed by natural processes. Every type of mineral can form in nature by processes that do not involve living things. A few minerals can also be produced by living creatures as part of their shells or bones. For example, how a clam makes a pearl.
Minerals form in many ways. The mineral halite, which is used as table salt, forms when water evaporates in a hot, shallow part of the ocean, leaving behind the salt it contained. Many types of minerals, including the ones in granite makes when molten rock cools. Talc, a mineral that can be used to make baby powder, forms deep in Earth as high pressure and temperature causes changes in solid rock.
Solid.
A mineral is a solid—that is, it has a definite volume and a rough shape. Volume refers to the amount of space an object takes up. For example a golf ball has a smaller volume than a baseball, and a baseball has a smaller volume than a basketball.
A substance that is a liquid or a gas is not a mineral. However, in some cases its solid form is a mineral. For instance, liquid water is not a mineral, but ice is.
Definite chemical makeup.
Each mineral has a definite chemical makeup: it consists of a specific combination of atoms of certain elements, which makes some of them smell. An element is a substance that contains only one type of atom. In turn, an atom is the smallest particle an element can be divided into. Everything people can see or touch is made up of atoms. Some substances, including the minerals gold and copper, consist of just one element. All the atoms in gold or copper are of the same type. However, most items contain atoms of more than one element. Most minerals are compounds, substances consisting or several elements in specific proportions. Halite, for example, has one atom
of sodiun for every atom of chlorine. The types of atoms that make up a mineral are part of what makes the mineral unique. The way the atoms are bonded, or joined together, is also important. Many properties of minerals are related to how strong or weak the bonds are.
Crystal Structure.
If people look closely at the particles of ice that make up frost, people will notice that they have smooth, flat surfaces. These flat surfaces form because of the arrangement of atoms in the ice, which is a mineral. Such an internal arrangement is a characteristic of minerals. It is the structure of a crystal, a solid in which the atoms are arranged in an orderly, repeating three-dimensional pattern. Each mineral has its own type of crystal structure. In some cases, two minerals have the same chemical composition but different crystal structures. For example, both diamond and graphite consist of just one element—carbon. But the arrangements of the carbon atoms in these two minerals are not the same, so they have different crystal structures and very different properties. Diamonds are extremely hard and have a brilliant sparkle. Graphite is soft, gray, and dull. In nature, a perfect crystal is rare. One can grow only when a mineral is free to form in an open space—a condition that rarely exists within Earth's crust. The photographs on page 47 show examples of nearly perfect crystals. The amount of space available for growth influences the shape and size of crystals. Most crystals have imperfect shapes because their growth was limited by other crystals forming next to them.
Minerals grouped according to composition.
Scientists classify minerals into groups on the basis of their chemical
makeups. The most common group is the silicates. All the minerals
in this group contain oxygen and silicon—the two most common
Though there are thousands of different minerals, only about 30 are
common in Earth's crust. These 30 minerals make up most rocks in the
crust. For that reason, they are called rock-forming minerals. Silicates,
which make up about 90 percent or the rocks in Earth’s crust, are the
most common rock-forming minerals. Quartz, feldspar, and mica
The second most common group of rock-forming minerals is the
carbonates. All the minerals in this group contain carbon and oxygen
joined together. Calcite, which is common in seashells, is
There are many other mineral groups. All are important, even
though their minerals may not be as common as rock-forming minerals.
For instance, the mineral group known as oxides contains the minerals
from which most metals, such as tin and copper, are refrned. An oxide
consists of an element, usually a metal, joined to oxygen. This group
includes hematite, a source of iron.
Minerals and rocks.
Minerals are different from rocks. A mineral is a chemical compound with a given composition and a defined crystal structure. A rock is a mixture of one or several minerals, in varying proportions.
