The Master is a character in the British science fiction television series "Doctor Who". He is an evil Time Lord and is one of the biggest enemies of the Doctor.
When the Master first appeared in January 1971 he was played by Roger Delgado, who continued in the role until his death in 1973. Afterwards, Peter Pratt and Geoffrey Beevers played a decayed version of the Time Lord, until Anthony Ainley assumed the part in 1981. He remained until "Doctor Whos cancellation in 1989. In 1996, the Master was played by Eric Roberts in the TV movie. In the revived series, Derek Jacobi provided the character's re-introduction before handing over to John Simm, who portrayed the Master in the end of the 2007 series.
History within the show.
In "The Sound of Drums" (2007), a flashback shows the Master at the age of eight, when as part of a Time Lord initiation ceremony he is taken before a gap in the fabric of space and time known as the Untempered Schism, from which one can see into the entire Vortex. The Doctor states that looking into the time vortex causes some to be inspired, some to run away (which he did), and others to go mad; it is implied that the latter is what happened to the Master.
A would-be universal conqueror, the Master wants to control the universe (in "The Deadly Assassin" his ambitions were becoming "the master of all matter", and in "The Sound of Drums" he acknowledges that he chose his own name). His most distinctive ability is that of hypnotising people by fixing them with an intense stare, often accompanied by the phrase, "I am the Master, and you will obey me."
Characteristics.
The Master and the Doctor are shown to have similar levels of intelligence, and were classmates on Gallifrey. This is mentioned several times in different stories ("The Five Doctors", "The Sea Devils" and "Terror of the Autons"). In the 2007 episode "Utopia", the Doctor calls the disguised Master a genius and shows an immense admiration for his intellect before discovering who he is.
Both the Doctor and the Master have been shown to be skilled hypnotists, although the Master's capacity to dominate – even by stare and voice alone – has been shown to be far more pronounced.
TARDIS.
In the original "Doctor Who" series, the Master's TARDISes have fully functioning chameleon circuits and have appeared as many things.
By the time of the new series, it is unclear whether any of the Master's TARDISes still exist. In "Rise of the Cybermen", the Tenth Doctor claims that his TARDIS is the last one in existence although at the time of his saying this, he also thought he was the last Time Lord. In "Utopia", the Master resorts to stealing the Doctor's TARDIS, with no explanation of how he travelled from the Time War to the end of the universe.
Other appearances.
The Master has also been featured in spin-offs of the series, which are of unclear canonicity and may not take place in the same continuity. The Master in these stories is, nevertheless, recognisably the same person.
One of the most important of these other appearances is David A. McIntee's "Master trilogy" of novels comprising "The Dark Path" and "First Frontier" in the Virgin Publishing lines and "The Face of the Enemy" for BBC Books, and the "Doctor Who" audio dramas produced by Big Finish Productions, in which Geoffrey Beevers has once agian played the Master.
Comic strips.
The Master returns in a new body and guise, that of a street preacher, in the previously mentioned "Doctor Who Magazine" (DWM) comic strip story "The Fallen", although the Doctor does not recognise him. The Master reveals himself a few stories later, in "The Glorious Dead" (DWM 287-296). The Master had survived the events of the television movie by encountering a cosmic being named Esterath in the time vortex. Esterath controls the Glory, the focal point of the Omniversal spectrum which underlies all existence. The Master's scheme to take control of the Glory fails, and he is banished to parts unknown (see Kroton).
