Muse are an English Alternative rock band. They formed in Teignmouth in 1994. There are three members. They are Matthew Bellamy (Guitar, Piano, Vocals), Chris Wolstenholme (Bass and background vocals) and Dominic Howard (Drums). They're sub-classified as mainly Progressive rock, with music often filled with melody and fast tempo, but they play many other styles of music too, especially on their older albums like "Showbiz". Their latest albums, "Black Holes and Revelations" and "Absolution" have had great success in the US, UK and most western countries of the world.
Creation and early EPs.
Matthew Bellamy, Chris Wolstenholme, and Dominic Howard grew up in a small town called Teignmouth in Devon. They were bored there, so they started playing music together. When they were 13 years old, they made a band called Gothic Plague. The band was later called Fixed Penalty, and then Rocket Baby Dolls. In 1994, while they were called Rocket Baby Dolls, they won a Battle of the Bands competition. During this competition, they broke their instruments, but still won. In 1997 they chose the name Muse. Muse's members did not like Teignmouth. In an interview in 1999 Bellamy said that it was full of people who took drugs, and that it was like a "living hell".
Muse left Teignmouth, and soon met producer Dennis Smith. He was interested in the band's work, and offered them a contract with his record label, Dangerous Records. Muse released their first EP, which was called "Muse", in 1997. The band went into more band competitions and won several. In 1998 they released their second EP, "Muscle Museum". The EP was popular, and Muse toured around Europe and Australia.
"Showbiz".
"Muscle Museums popularity helped Muse get a record contract with Maverick Records in the United States. The band began work on a new album. They had already written eighty songs, but they still wrote some new songs for their next album. The other songs they used had already appeared on their previous EPs. Muse worked with producer John Leckie, who had produced Radiohead's second album, "The Bends".
Muse released their first album, "Showbiz", in 1999. In the US, Maverick had a large advertising campaign, trying to increase Muse's popularity. However, Muse were already popular in the UK, and "NME" said they were "the first great British guitar band of the 21st century". US magazine "Rolling Stone" said "Showbiz" sounded a lot like Radiohead, a comparison Matthew Bellamy did not like. Muse would be compared to Radiohead regularly in future. Other reviewers noted that the band had a lot of potential after listening to "Showbiz".
"Origin of Symmetry".
Muse spent most of 2000 touring to promote "Showbiz" and their work. The highlight was touring with Red Hot Chili Peppers and Foo Fighters. The band played at over 50 music festivals in Europe, and several in Japan. While they were touring, the band recorded a small number of songs for their next album. In January 2001, they started working on the rest with producer John Leckie, in Peter Gabriele's studio.
Muse began touring again in May 2001, after finishing the album. They had not released it, but Bellamy told BBC he thought the best way to promote it was to play live music. The band's second album, "Origin of Symmetry", was released in June 2001 in the UK. However, it was only released in North America in 2005. The album did not do well on charts, but was popular with critics. "NME" praised the album for the songs on it being very loud and angry. Allmusic said the album was very loud and sometimes ridiculous because of the instruments and riffs used on it, but that it was still very good.
"Feeling Good", a song from "Origin of Symmetry" (which was a cover of the original song by Nina Simone), was used in an advertisement by Nescafé. Muse sued Nescafé because they did not agree with how the company did business. They received money from Nescafé after suing, which they donated to Oxfam. Celine Dion also nearly got sued when she tried to use the name Muse as the title of a performance in Las Vegas.
"Absolution".
Muse's third album was recorded in many studios in places including London and Los Angeles. The band were very committed to making music; in the recording sessions for their older albums, they had wasted more time. Muse started work in September 2003 with producer Paul Reeve, but they could not make many songs they liked. They took a break for Christmas, and then changed their producer to Rich Costey. Most of the album was recorded in 2004. The album's themes included politics, death, and the Apocalypse. The guitar performances on the new album were simpler than on "Origin of Symmetry". Bellamy used on brand of guitar for the whole album, and this gave an "immense" sound according to "Total Guitar" magazine.
To promote "Absolution", Muse toured around the UK and North America. During their first show in the United States, in Atlanta, Bellamy injured his mouth by accidentally hitting himself with his guitar, and needed stitches. The band had to cancel several shows, but kept going with the tour. Muse played at the Glastonbury Festival in June 2004. After the concert, they said it was "the best gig of our lives". Shortly after the show, however, Howard's father died. While they were very said that he died, Bellamy said they were happy that Howard's father had been at the concert and had seen the band's "finest moment". In 2005, Muse played four songs at Live 8.
"Black Holes & Revelations".
In January 2005 Muse finished their world two when they played two big concerts in London. Bellamy said they wanted to start making new music soon after this. However, they also wanted to tour through the US again, because they had become popular there for the first time. Costey was producer for the band's new album, like he was for "Absolution". The band recorded their fourth album, "Black Holes & Revelations", in a château in the countryside of France, because they wanted to be away from distraction. However, they still recorded the album very slowly.
