Methamphetamine (also called methylamphetamine, or desoxyephedrine, often referred to as Crystal Meth) is a drug created by humans in laboratories. It is a stimulant. Many people use it illegally, but it can be used legally to treat narcolepsy or Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). When people take crystal meth, it creates a strong feeling of euphoria (happiness) and energy. Crystal meth is very addictive. This means that when people start taking the drug, they will want to keep taking more, even if it is making them sick. Crystal meth users often begin to lose weight because of the loss of appetite (wanting to eat) that occurs.
Using/Effects.
Crystal meth can be snorted, smoked, injected, or eaten.
Snorting.
With the "snorting" method, the crystal meth crystals are ground up and made into little lines (also called Rails) and inhaled through the nose with rolled up paper, rolled up dollar bills or an empty plastic pen tube.
It takes effect faster than eating it. However, it can be damaging to the inside of the nose. The effect takes longer than smoking or injecting, and there is not as strong of a "rush" (happy feeling). As well, if people share the same snorting tube or rolled-up paper, they can get infections. It also may be injected through the butt hole.
Smoking.
The crystals are placed into a pipe (called a speed pipe) or a hollowed out lightbulb and warmed up from underneath by a flame (lighter, matches etc.). The Crystal Meth is not actually "smoked" this way, but heated up until it melts. When it melts it turns into a gas that is then sucked into the user's lungs and held in. Smoking gives the fastest onset of the "happy feeling" and the strongest "happy" feeling. However, the vapor (gas) can damage the lungs, and smoking is more addictive than snorting or eating.
Injecting.
The crystal meth can be mixed with water and warmed up, then put into a needle and injected. Injecting gives the fastest onset of the "happy feeling" and the strongest "happy" feeling. However, it can damage the body, it is very addictive, and people can get infections from dirty needles.
Eating.
If the crystal meth is eaten, it gets absorbed into the body from the digestive system (stomach, intestines). This is the safest way to take meth, and gives the longest lasting "high". However, it takes a longer time for the person to get a "high", and there is not a strong "high" feeling.
Dangers of using crystal meth.
If people use crystal meth, they may take too much and get sick or even die. This is called an "overdose" (taking too much). As well, when people take crystal meth, they get intoxicated (like being drunk on alcohol) and some people become aggressive. When a person is intoxicated, they can get hurt if they drive a car or a boat. As well, when a person is intoxicated, they may do dangerous things, such as have unsafe sex with a person that they do not know, or get into a violent fight with a person.
Crystal Meth is a very addictive drug. This means that if a person starts taking the drug, they will want to keep taking it, and it will be hard to stop, even if the drug is making a person sick (ill). When a person is addicted to a drug, they do bad or criminal acts to get money for more drugs, such as crimes (for example theft, robbery, fraud, or prostitution).
Another danger from using crystal meth is infection with dangerous diseases such as AIDS or Hepatitis C. When a person is taking crystal meth, a person can get an AIDS or Hepatitis C infection from another person if they are sharing the same pipe, pen tube, or syringe (needle). As well, if a person is "high" on crystal meth, they could get an AIDS or Hepatitis C infection from having unsafe sex with a person that they do not know.
