Miramax Films is a American motion picture distribution and production company. It was headquartered in New York, New York before being bought out by The Walt Disney Company.
It was created by the brothers Harvey and Bob Weinstein in Buffalo, New York in 1979. The name comes from combining the first names of their parents "Max" and "Miriam". The company was created to distribute independent films which the major movie studio didn't think were worth distributing.
The company's first success came when the Weinsteins teamed up with British producer Martin Lewis. They got the US rights to two concert movies of benefit shows for human rights organization Amnesty International. The Weinsteins worked with Lewis to combine the two movies into one movie. The movie "The Secret Policeman's Other Ball" was a successful release for Miramax in the summer of 1982.
Among the company's most well known movies as distributors were "The Crying Game", "sex, lies, and videotape", "Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!" and "Scandal". The company also made movies such as "Pulp Fiction" and "Shakespeare In Love"
Miramax also produced many movies which made a lot of money. The company became one of the leaders of the independent film revolution of the 1990s. It produced or distributed seven movies that made more than $100 million at the box office. Its most successful movie, "Chicago", earned more than $300 million.
In 1993, The Walt Disney Company bought Miramax for $70 million. Harvey and Bob Weinstein ran Miramax until they left the company on September 30, 2005. The Weinstein brothers ran Miramax separately of other Disney companies. However, Disney had the final say on what Miramax could release.
On March 30, 2005, Disney and the Weinsteins said that they would not renew their contract when their current one expired at the end of September 2005. Buena Vista Motion Pictures Group took control of Miramax, which will have a smaller annual production budget. The Weinsteins started a new movie production company titled The Weinstein Company and took the Dimension Movies label with them. The Miramax name stayed with the movie studio owned by Disney. It is currently run by Daniel Battsek.
Miramax also has a family films division, Miramax Family Films.
Miramax is one of the Big Ten movie studios.
