Mitosis is when one animal or plant cell creates two identical copies of itself by splitting in half. Before mitosis, the cell creates an identical set of genetic information - this is called "DNA replication". The duplicated genetic information then winds up into a visible object called a chromosome. A chromosome is made up of two chromatids joined at the centromere.
Mitosis happens in all types of cells in the human body apart from three types: sperm, ova, and neurons. The sex cells (sperm and ova (also called gametes)) go through a different division method called meiosis and neurons do not ever divide.
Phases of Mitosis.
There are six phases of mitosis. Each phase is used to describe what kind of change the cell is going through. The phases are Interphase, Prophase, Metaphase, Anaphase, Telophase, and Cytokinesis. Some may consider Pro-metaphase as part of the phases but most believe it is part of metaphase and some of the end of prophase. Each phase is important to mitosis.
Prophase.
During prophase, the cell's genetic material (DNA), or deoxyribonucleic acid, along with ribonucleic acid (RNA), coils up into bunches called chromosomes. The genetic material has already been duplicated during interphase, so there are double the amount of chromosomes in a normal cell in it. For example, a human cell normally has 23 pairs of chromosomes, but during early mitosis there are 46 pairs.
Metaphase.
During metaphase, the chromosomes are pulled by microtubules called spindle fibers into place. The chromosomes line up on the cell's equator, or center line, and are prepared for division.
Anaphase.
During anaphase, the chromomsomes lin up into the middle of the cells
Telophase.
Telophase is the final stage in mitosis, as the cell itself is ready to divide (also known as Cytokenisis). One complete set of chromosomes is now at each pole of the cell. The spindle fibres begin to disappear, and a nuclear membrane forms around each set of chromosomes. Also a nucleolus appears within each new nucleus and single stranded chromosomes uncoil into invisible strands of chromatin.
Cytokinesis.
Cytokinesis, even though it is a very important to cell division, is not considered a mitotic stage. During cytokinesis, the cell physically splits. This occurs just after anaphase and during telophase. The cleavage furrow, which is the pinch caused by the ring of proteins, pinches off completely, closing off the cell. The cell now has reproduced itself successfully. After cytokinesis, the cell goes back into interphase, where the cycle is repeated. If cytokinesis were to occur to a cell that had not gone through mitosis, then the daughter cells would be different or not function properly. One would still have the nucleus and the other would lack a nucleus. Cytokinesis is different in both animals and plant cells. In Plant cells, instead of splitting into two halves, it forms a cell plate.
