Marcel Dupré (born Rouen, Normandy, 3 May 1886; died Meudon, Paris, 30 May 1971), was a French organist, composer, and teacher. He became famous all over the world for his organ playing, and he composed a lot of organ music, most of which is very difficult indeed to play.
Biography.
Marcel Dupré was born in Rouen (Normandy, France). His family were musical. His father Albert Dupré was organist at the gothic abbey of St Ouen in Rouen. The young Marcel was a child prodigy. He entered the Paris Conservatoire in 1904, where he studied the piano and organ. His organ teachers were the most famous organists in France: Alexandre Guilmant and Louis Vierne, and also Charles-Marie Widor who taught him how to compose. In 1914, Dupré won the Grand Prix de Rome for his cantata, "Psyché". However, he did not have to spend time in Rome because he had already composed so much music. In 1926, he became professor of organ performance and improvisation at the Paris Conservatoire, and stayed in that job until 1954.
Dupré became famous for performing more than 2,000 organ recitals in Europe, the United States, Canada and Australia. In 1920 he gave a series of concerts in the Paris Conservatoire in which he played all the organ works by Johann Sebastian Bach from memory. He soon became world famous.
In 1934 Charles-Marie Widor retired as organist at St. Sulpice in Paris, and Dupré took over the job, which he kept until his death in 1971.
From 1947-1954, he was director of the American Conservatory, which was in the Louis XV wing of the Château de Fontainebleau near Paris. In 1954, Dupré took over from Claude Delvincourt as director of the Paris Conservatoire, where he stayed until 1956. He died in 1971 in Meudon (near Paris) at the age of 85.
His playing.
When Dupré gave organ recitals he often played his own compositions as well as those of other composers, especially Bach. Like Widor and Vierne he composed some long works in several movements which he called “Symphonies” (the French spelling of “symphony”). When he played in church services he played in a more serious style. He would start by playing composed music which was suitable for the time of year. Then he would improvise, playing complicated fugues, trio sonatas and chorale improvisations. He was so good at improvising that many people thought he had composed the music beforehand.
When playing in concerts he was often given a tune, and then he would immediately make up a whole “symphonie” from that tune. In 1906, when he was still a student, he played for a wedding and two services when the famous Widor was going to be absent. Dupré asked Widor what music he should play. Widor told him to improvise something. Dupré waited for Widor to go out of the church before he started practising, but Widor crept back in and listened to him. He realized that Dupré would manage very well.
His teaching.
Dupré was famous as an organ teacher. He taught two generations of well-known organists including Jehan Alain, Marie-Claire Alain, Pierre Cochereau, Jeanne Demessieux,Jean Guillou, Jean Langlais, and Olivier Messiaen.
His compositions.
Dupré composed a large amount of organ music. When he was a boy he got to know Aristide Cavaillé-Coll, the most famous organ builder in France. Cavaillé-Coll had built the organ that Dupré’s father played, so he was used to the sound of modern French organs. Most of Dupré's music for the organ is difficult to play. Some of his best-known organ music was written early in his life. These include the "Three Preludes and Fugues", Op. 7 (1914). Even the famous Widor thought that the Prelude of the third piece was impossible to play. However, Dupré could play it, and many organists after him learned to play it, too.
Some other very famous works of his include the "Symphonie-Passion", the "Esquisses" and "Évocation", and the "Cortège et Litanie".
As well as composing lots of music, Dupré prepared study editions of the organ works of Bach, Handel, Mozart, Liszt, Mendelssohn, Schumann, César Franck, and Alexander Glazunov. He also wrote music for people who were learning to play the organ, and books on how to improvise on the organ.
References.
“Marcel Dupré at Saint-Sulpice” – Gerard Brooks: Organist’s Review Aug 1986 p.161-166
