Mamie Geneva Doud Eisenhower (November 14, 1896 - November 1, 1979) was the wife of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the President of the United States. She acted as the First Lady of the United States from 1953 to 1961. They had married on 1st July 1916.
Early life.
Her birthplace is Boone, Iowa. Her father was John Sheldon Doud. He became very rich after earning much money in meatpacking industry. For sometime, Doud family lived in Pueblo, Colorado. Then the family settled Denver, Colorado. There Mamie and her three sisters grew in a big house. The family had many servants.
Marriage and family.
In 1915, Mamie met Dwight D. Eisenhower. At that time, he was a young second lieutenant. On St. Valentine's Day in 1916 he gave her a ring as token of their engagement. On 1st July 1916, they married.
Their first son, Doud Dwight, was born in 1917. He died in 1921 of scarlet fever. A second son, John Eisenhower was born in 1922. He became an author, and also served as a U.S. ambassador to Belgium.
Their life was like any other family of army officers – moving from one place to another. Mamie once estimated that in 37 years, they shifted to at least 27 places. They lived in many places in the United States. They also lived near Panama Canal; in France; and in Philippines.
During the Second World War, “Ike” continued to rise in the army. She lived in Washington DC. After the Second World War, her husband became president of the Colombia University. They bought a farm at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. It was the first home they had ever bought. Before becoming President of the United States, her husband also served as the commander of the of North Atlantic Treaty Organization
The First Lady.
She was the First Lady for about eight years, from 1953 to 1961. She was a popular First Lady. She was a charming lady. She wore pretty dresses and jewelry. Many leaders from different countries came to the White House. They received a very good welcome.
Later life.
After retirement of her husband as the President of the United States, Mamie and her husband returned to Gettysburg. They lived there eight years retirement together. In 1969, her husband died. Mamie continued to live on the farm. She died on 1st November 1979. At the time of her death she was 82 years old. Her grave lies by the side of her husband’s grave in a small chapel. The chapel is a part of the Eisenhower Library in Abilene, Kansas.
Trivia.
In fact, Mamie was not a very good cook. But, her fudge had become famous. Her husband, Ike enjoyed the fudge. He and many people named this fudge as Mamie's Million Dollar Fudge. In many meals served at the White House, the fudge was a part. Many magazines and newspapers printed the recipe to prepare the fudge.
Popular culture.
A park in southeast Denver (Colorado) bears her name.
