My Chemical Romance are a post-hardcore and alternative rock band from New Jersey. This band was started in 2001 by Gerard Way. They released their first album in 2002. The band has released three albums to date. The current members of the band are Gerard Way (lead vocals), Ray Toro (lead guitar / vocals), Mikey Way (bass guitar), Frank Iero (rhythm guitar / vocals), and Bob Bryar (drummer).
History.
The band was started by Gerard Way on the day of the September 11, 2001 attacks after he was on his way to work in New York and saw the bodies falling from the building. He thought to himself "what am I doing with my life? I'm slaving away doing drawings for Cartoon Network and not actually helping anybody", he then called up his friend Matt Pelissier who went on to recruit Ray Toro - the band's lead guitarist. Gerard said "there's nobody in New Jersey who can beat him, he is the best". Gerard's brother Mikey Way, bass guitarist, joined his brother's new band soon after.
Progression.
In May of 2002, Frank Iero joined as the rhythm guitarist for the band. He was more than happy to leave college against his parents wishes to join his favourite band, and whilst MCR were on tour, he got a tattoo of a scorpion as high up on his neck as he could get it, so he couldn't get a job.
In 2004, Pelissier was kicked out of the band for repeatedly messing up songs during live performances, general bad behaviour and disregard towards other members of the band. He was replaced by Bob Bryar - a sound technician for The Used and Thursday at the time.
Name.
The name of the band comes from an Irvine Welsh book titled "Ecstasy: Three Tales of Chemical Romance" which caught Mikey Way's eye when he was working in Barnes & Noble.
"I Brought You My Bullets, You Brought Me Your Love.
The band released their first album on July 23 2002. It was titled "I Brought You My Bullets, You Brought Me Your Love". The album featured the first song written by the band, Skylines And Turnstiles, which Gerard began to write after the 9/11 attacks, in 2001.
Three Cheers for Sweet Revenge.
The second album by My Chemical Romance,"Three Cheers for Sweet Revenge", was the album that shot them to fame with songs like "I'm Not Okay (I Promise)" and "Helena" (A song written about the Way brothers' grandmother, Elena. Her friends called her Helen, and Gerard thought of her as Helena). It was released in June 2004. Over two million copies of the album have been sold in the United States. The album contained a lot about death, dying and killing, but also showed the better sides of the matter. Inside the CD, Gerard commented with, "To K, sorry I wrote all the songs about killing you. The last song should make up for it." - The last song being "I Never Told You What I Did For A Living."
During 2004, drummer Matt Pelissier was kicked out of the band, and MCR no longer like speaking of him as they, "don't like talking shit."
The Black Parade.
Their latest album titled "The Black Parade" was released on October 23rd 2006. The album sold more than 240,000 copies in the first week after it was released. It has sold over 1 million copies in total. The first single taken from The Black Parade called "Welcome to the Black Parade" reached the top 10 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and No.1 in the UK charts for two weeks.
The band has commented in the past about the album, saying that The Black Parade is like a different band performing in a different 'world', and once that's over, My Chemical Romance will never be The Black Parade again. The album largely focuses on one character, The Patient, but also consists of songs and lyrics about different subjects and aspects of life and death.
