Mighty Morphin Power Rangers is a television series which ran for 3 seasons (one season of television is made in a year), which is longer than the Power Rangers shows after this series have lasted. This series has 155 episodes in total. The next show after the third season is called Power Rangers Zeo. There are many different versions of Power Rangers, and most of them were made with better technology, yet many still prefer this one more than any other. Like all Power Rangers shows, Mighty Morphin Power Rangers is based off other shows from Japan. Each season of Mighty Morphin Power Rangers is based off a different show from Japan.
Plot.
Five teenagers battle against the witch Rita and the wizard Lord Zedd to defend the earth. They have large robots called Zords and battle suits for their fights. They are armed with special weapons like swords, axes, bows, daggers and lances to help them fight monsters. Rita and Lord Zedd have an army of fighters known as Putties, which get destroyed and broken into many pieces when they are hit by their weak spot - a Z plate on their chest.
Season 1: Dinosaurs.
Rita is in a prison on the Moon. When she gets out of it, she wants to destroy Earth, because that's what she wanted to do before she was put in prison. She brings along her helpers, who were also in prison. One of them is called Goldar. He is a blue gorilla in gold armor who can fight better than anyone. To stop her, five teenagers are chosen by a wizard called Zordon. Zordon has an robot called Alpha 5 who helps him. The teenagers are given special magic coins that turn them into Power Rangers.
Rita has her own magic coin, and uses it to make her own evil Power Ranger, the Green Ranger. The Green Ranger fights the good Power Rangers, because Rita is controlling his mind. They free him from Rita's evil magic, but his magic coin stops working the right way, and begins to hurt him when he uses it. The Green Ranger gives up his magic coin to the Red Ranger who won't get hurt by it.
Season 2: Legendary Animals.
When Lord Zedd comes into the show, he destroys the Power Rangers' Zords. Zordon takes the Green Ranger's magic coin and uses it to make new Zords for the Power Rangers. These new Zords are mostly fairy tale animals, like the unicorn and the dragon. The old Zords were Dinosaurs, like Triceratops and T-Rex. Lord Zedd also puts Rita back in her prison and throws her away into space, because she was not doing a good enough job of being evil.
But one day, a new Power Ranger appears. His costume is white, and his Zord is a white tiger. No one knows who he is, but he turns out to be the old Green Ranger. Later, three of the Power Rangers decide to leave the team and go to Switzerland. They choose three teenagers from another school to take their powers.
Rita comes back, too, and gives Lord Zedd a love potion. He falls in love with her, and they get married. Goldar gives Lord Zedd another potion to stop the love potion, but Lord Zedd's love for Rita turns out to be true and they stay married.
Season 3: Ninja.
Rita's brother, Rito Revolto, comes to visit his sister. He looks like a skeleton. Rito does what Rita and Lord Zedd could not do, and destroys the Power Ranger's magic coins. The Power Rangers go and find Ninjor, a powerful ninja (a ninja is a type of fighter from Japan), who made the magic coins. He agrees to help them and makes new coins and new Zords for them. They become Ninja Power Rangers, and their new Zords are animals like the wolf and the frog.
At the end of this season, Rita and Rito's father comes to Earth. He is very powerful, even more powerful than his son and daughter together. He uses magic to turn back time, making the Power Rangers into children. They lose their new ninja powers, and go off to find new powers. The next show, Power Rangers Zeo, starts after this happens.
Power Rangers.
Jason Lee Scott - The first Red Ranger. He is the leader. He leaves the team to go to Switzerland.
Trini Kwan - The first Yellow Ranger. She also leaves the team for Switzerland.
Billy Cranston - The Blue Ranger. He is often bullied by other teenagers because he is smart and shy.
Kimberly Hart - The first Pink Ranger. She leaves the team to become an athlete.
Zach Taylor - The first Black Ranger. He also leaves to go to Switzerland.
Tommy Oliver - The Green Ranger. He later becomes the White Ranger.
Rocky DeSantos - The second Red Ranger.
Aisha Campbell - The second Yellow Ranger.
Adam Park - The second Black Ranger.
Katherine Hillard - The second Pink Ranger.
