Charge density and the electric field.
where formula_23 is the "free" electric charge density (in units of C/m3), not including dipole charges bound in a material, and formula_11 is the electric displacement field (in units of C/m2). This equation corresponds to Coulomb's law for stationary charges in vacuum.
where formula_15 is the area of a differential square on the closed surface A with an outward facing surface normal defining its direction, and formula_27 is the free charge enclosed by the surface.
where, again, formula_9 is the electric field (in units of V/m), formula_35 is the total charge density (including bound charges), and formula_32 (approximately 8.854 pF/m) is the permittivity of free space. formula_30 can also be written as formula_38, where formula_39 is the material's relative permittivity or its "dielectric constant".
Compare Poisson's equation.
The structure of the magnetic field.
formula_12 is the magnetic flux density (in units of teslas, T), also called the magnetic induction.
formula_15 is the area of a differential square on the surface formula_44 with an outward facing surface normal defining its direction.
This equation only works if the integral is done over a closed surface.
This equation says, that in every volume the sum of the incoming magnetic field lines equals the sum of the outgoing magnetical field lines. This means that the magnetic field lines must be closed loops. Another way of putting it is that the field lines cannot originate from somewhere.
Mathematically formulated: "There are no magnetic monopoles".
A changing magnetic flux and the electric field.
ΦB is the magnetic flux through the area A described by the second equation
E is the electric field generated by the magnetic flux
s is a closed path in which current is induced, such as a wire
v is the instantaneous velocity of the line element (for moving circuits).
The electromotive force (sometimes denoted formula_48, not to be confused with the permittivity above) is equal to the value of this integral.
This law corresponds to the Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction.
Some textbooks show the right hand sign of the Integral form with an "N" (representing the number of coils of wire that are around the edge of "A") in front of the flux derivative. The "N" can be taken care of in calculating "A" (multiple wire coils means multiple surfaces for the flux to go through), and it is an engineering detail so it has been omitted here.
The negative sign is necessary to maintain conservation of energy. It is so important that it even has its own name, Lenz's law.
This equation relates the electric and magnetic fields. This equation e.g. describes how electric motors and electric generators work. In a motor or generator, the fixed excitation is provided by the field circuit and the varying voltage is measured across the armature circuit.
Maxwell's equations apply to a right-handed coordinate system. To apply them unmodified to a left handed system would mean a reversal of polarity of magnetic fields (not inconsistent, but confusingly against convention).
The source of the magnetic field.
where H is the magnetic field strength (in units of A/m), related to the magnetic flux B by a constant called the permeability, μ (B = μH), and J is the current density, defined by: J = ∫ρqvdV where v is a vector field called the drift velocity that describes the velocities of that charge carriers which have a density described by the scalar function ρq.
"s" is the edge of the open surface "A" (any surface with the curve "s" as its edge will do), and "I"encircled is the current encircled by the curve "s" (the current through any surface is defined by the equation: "I"through "A" = ∫"AJ·dA)."
If the electric flux density does not vary rapidly, the second term on the right hand side (the displacement flux) is negligible, and the equation reduces to Ampere's law.
Covariant Formulation.
There are only two covariant Maxwell Equations, because the covariant field vector includes the electrical and the magnetical field.
"Mathematical note: In this section the abstract index notation will be used."
where formula_55 is the 4-current, formula_56 is the field strength tensor (written as a 4 × 4 matrix), formula_57 is the Levi-Civita symbol, and formula_58 is the 4-gradient (so that formula_59 is the d'Alembertian operator). (The formula_60 in the first equation is implicitly summed over, according to Einstein notation.) The first tensor equation expresses the two inhomogeneous Maxwell's equations: Gauss' law and Ampere's law with Maxwell's correction. The second equation expresses the other two, homogenous equations: Faraday's law of induction and the absence of magnetic monopoles.
More explicitly, formula_61 (as a contravariant vector), in terms of the charge density ρ and the current density formula_62. The 4-current satisfies the continuity equation
formula_63
The fact that both electric and magnetic fields are combined into a single tensor expresses the fact that, according to relativity, both of these are different aspects of the same thing—by changing frames of reference, what seemed to be an electric field in one frame can appear as a magnetic field in another frame, and vice versa.
Using the tensor form of Maxwell's equations, the first equation implies
formula_69
(See Electromagnetic four-potential for the relationship between the d'Alembertian of the four-potential and the four-current, expressed in terms of the older vector operator notation).
Different authors sometimes employ different sign conventions for the above tensors and 4-vectors (which does not affect the physical interpretation).
formula_56 and formula_71 are "not" the same: they are related by the Minkowski metric tensor formula_72: formula_73. This introduces sign changes in some of "Fs components; more complex metric dualities are encountered in general relativity.
