Melina Perez (born March 9, 1979) ring name as Melina, is an American professional wrestler and manager. She currently works for World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) wrestling on its RAW brand, although she is currently out on a foot injury that will keep her out for an unknown amount of time.
Early Life.
Perez began her career as a model. In 2000, she decided to become a professional wrestler and began training. Perez's pro-wrestling debut was in 2002 on a tour of the independent wrestling scene. She joined a number of California-based promotions such as the Empire Wrestling Federation (EWF).
World Wrestling Entertainment.
Perez began working in World Wrestling Entertainment's "farm territory" Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW) in March 2004 when she was kayfabe brought her in as a way to taunt her ex-boyfriend John Hennigan. Melina, however, aligned herself with Hennigan, who later changed his ring name to Johnny Nitro. Soon after, Nitro began teaming with Joey Matthews, later known as Joey Mercury. On November 10, the trio, now known as MNM, won the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship.
2005.
MNM made their debut in WWE on the April 14, 2005 edition of SmackDown! by interrupting the first ever Carlito's Cabana interview segment. Rey Mysterio, one half of the WWE Tag Team Champions, was a guest. Melina insulted Mysterio and had Mercury and Nitro attack him. This led to MNM's first match the next week on SmackDown! for the tag team title. MNM won the match against Mysterio and Eddie Guerrero, giving them their first WWE Tag Team Title reign.
While managing the Tag Team Champions, Melina started wrestling against the other WWE Divas. She had her first match on June 30 against Michelle McCool. Her first pay-per-view match – a Bra and Panties match – was at The Great American Bash against Torrie Wilson. Melina won both matches.
2007.
On January 29, 2007, Melina became the number 1 contender for the WWE Women's Championship. On February 5 Melina lost a title match against Mickie James. On February 19, Melina won the Women's Championship from James. On April 24 at a show in Paris, France, Melina lost the Women's Championship in a Triple Threat match to James when James pinned Victoria. In a rematch on the same night, she pinned James to regain the title and become a two-time WWE Women's Champion.
On May 7 Melina was defeated in a tag team match when she was pinned by Candice Michelle. Melina lost to Candice in several tag team matches, as well as in non-title bouts over the next few weeks. At Vengeance, Melina lost the Women's Championship to Candice, and failed to wim the title back at The Great American Bash.
