A nightclub is a type of bar for adults to socialize and meet other adults and consume alcoholic drinks such as wine, beer, and mixed drinks. Most nightclubs are only open in the evening and in the night. Some nightclubs are open during the day, but in these cases, the facility usually provides a different service, such as a restaurant service.
Activities.
Some nightclubs have a dance floor and a DJ playing pop, rock, and dance music recordings so that people can dance. Some nightclubs have entertainment such as pop bands, rock bands, or comedians. Some nightclubs have a quieter lounge area with couches, sofas, and low tables, so that people can talk together.
Food and drinks.
Some nightclubs also serve a small selection of food, usually snacks or finger food (food that you can eat with your fingers and hands). Nightclubs often have a much wider selection of alcoholic drinks than pubs (pubs specialize in beer and ale). Most nightclubs sell a number of different brands of spirits, liquers, wine, sherry, Some nightclubs have a large selection of expensive brands of alcohol (these are called "premium" brands).
The bartenders (also called "barmen" or "barmaids") at nightclubs often make a much larger variety of mixed drinks than pubs. Mixed drinks and cocktails are alcoholic drinks that consist of one or more types of alcohol (e.g., rum, vodka, whiskey, etc.) mixed with flavorings such as orange juice, cream, chocolate syrup, or soda. Many mixed drinks also include ice, crushed ice, or sliced lemon or lime.
Some well-known mixed drinks include the martini, the "Rum and Coke", and the "screwdriver" (orange juice mixed with vodka).
Staff.
Nightclubs hire a variety of staff to do different jobs. Bartenders (also called "barmen" or "barmaids") at nightclubs serve alcohol and mix drinks. Some nightclubs hire servers to bring drinks to people who are sitting at tables or in chairs. Some nightclubs also hire people to take away empty bottles and glasses.
Security in nightclubs is provided by "doormen" and "bouncers". Doormen check the identification of people entering the nightclub, to ensure that people that are too young to drink do not enter the club. Doormen also prevent drunk or aggressive people from entering the nightclub. If a person in the nightclub begins fighting or hurting people, the bouncers escort that person out of the nightclub and call the police.
Nightclubs that serve food have cooks, dishwashers, and servers to prepare, cook, and serve the food. Nightclubs also have coat check employees who hang up the patron's coats, sound technicians to maintain the sound system (the CD players, amplifiers, and speakers), and cleaners (to sweep the floors and clean the bathrooms). Some large nightclubs may hire DJs to work in the club every week as employees.
DJs, bands, comedians who entertain patrons during the evening are usually not usually employees of the nightclub. Instead, the nightclub signs a contract with these entertainers, in which the entertainer promises to come to the club on a specified night, in return for a sum of money.
