Nanyang Technological University (Abbreviation: NTU) is a big research university in Singapore. The University garden campus is called as the Yunnan Garden campus. It is in the southwestern part of Singapore.
Campus.
The Yunnan Garden Campus, has a pretty green landscape. It is some 25km from the city center. The original part of the campus was built in 1986. The campus buildings are built from a master plan drawn by architect Kenzo Tange.
The campus has many modern facilities for teaching and research. The new School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences building, which is under construction, houses laboratories that are designed along those at Oxford University and will be the best equipped and most modern of laboratories among Singapore universities. Another beautiful building is the School of Art, Design and Media. The roofs of the building have grasses on the top that looks like a small rolling hill in the garden campus.
Staff and students can live in good dorms and residential halls within the NTU Campus. They have access to a many leisure and recreational facilities.
In late 2000, NTU's National Institute of Education shifted into its new, state-of-the-art, $400 million campus at the NTU grounds.
Colleges, Schools and Institutes.
NTU has 4 colleges, comprising 12 schools.
The College of Engineering, with six schools ranking fourth in the world in engineering publications.
The Nanyang Business School (College of Business) ranks world's top 100 MBA programmes.
The College of Humanities, Arts, & Social Sciences along with the Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information. This School is named after the late Dr Wee Kim Wee. He was one of the old President of Singapore who was a highly respected.
Research Institutes and Centres.
NTU has multi-country programs and initiatives with good institutions worldwide. Some examples are MIT, Stanford University, Cornell University, Caltech, University of Washington, Carnegie Mellon University. It also has tie ups with universities in Asia such as Beijing University, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Waseda, IIT of India and top universities in Europe like the University of Cambridge, Imperial College, HSR (University of Applied Sciences Rapperswil), Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, University of St Gallen, University of Technology of Compiegne and University of Technology of Troyes.
Finances.
NTU receives funding mainly from the Government through the Ministry of Education. A part of these funds comes from tuition fees and other sources of income. For development projects, separate funding is provided by the Government. From 1 April 2006, the university has become self governing. This gives the university more freedom when making decisions in management, strategic planning, tuition fees, and admission policy.
