Nuclear power is the controlled use of nuclear energy. Nuclear energy can be freed by nuclear reactions. This energy is made into electricity, which then can be used to power machines and heat homes. Today, 15% of the world's energy comes from nuclear power. Nuclear power generates toxic waste which is harmful after it makes electricity, so people are afraid of using it, but it is still used because it does not pollute the environment.
History.
Nuclear fission was first experimented by Enrico Fermi.
Debate.
Like with other technologies, using nuclear power has benefits and drawbacks. It can reduce the emission of carbon dioxide compared to some other methods of generating power. Since it does not depend on oil being burned, it reduces the dependency of certain countries on oil imports. The supporters of nuclear energy also claim that the risks of storing waste are small. These risks can be reduced even more by using better technology in the reactors. Compared to other ways of generating energy, the safety record of nuclear energy is good already, they say.
Critics claim that using nuclear power can be a dangerous source of energy. They also question whether the risks can be reduced by using better technology. Critics also point to the problem that radioactive waste has to be stored for a very long time. Storing such waste may lead to radioactive contamination in the area where it is stored. Sites were radioactive waste is stored also need to be well-protected against sabotage or accidents.
Both camps use arguments that relate to the economic aspects and safety of nuclear power plants. Safety, cost, and pollution are all big concerns. Accidents like those at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl are the most famous, and show how nuclear accidents can be expensive and dangerous to the people and animals living in the surrounding areas.
Accidents.
Like with other technologies, accidents involving nuclear power happened. A scale was created to measure how dangerous the accident was. It is called International Nuclear Event Scale. The scale has 8 levels (0-7), 7 is the worst.
