Numbers are also used for other things besides counting. Numbers are used when things are measured. Numbers are used to study how the world works. Mathematics is a way to use numbers to learn about the world and make things.
Numbers for people.
There are different ways of giving symbols to numbers. These methods are called number systems. The most common number system that people use is the "base ten" number system. The "base ten" number system is also called the "decimal" number system. The base ten number system is common because people have ten fingers and ten toes. There are 10 different symbols used in the base ten number system. These ten symbols are called digits.
A symbol for a number is made up of these ten digits. The position of the digits shows how big the number is. For example, the number 23 in the decimal number system really means 2 times 10 plus 3, and 101 means 1 times a hundred (=100) plus 0 times 10 (=0) plus 1 times 1 (=1).
Numbers for machines.
Another number system is more common for machines. The machine number system is called the "binary" number system. The binary number system is also called the base two number system. There are two different symbols (0,1) used in the base two number system. These two symbols are called bits.
A symbol for a binary number is made up of these two bit symbols. The position of the bit symbols shows how big the number is. For example, the number 10 in the binary number system really means 1 times 2 plus 0, and 101 means 1 times four (=4) plus 0 times two (=0) plus 1 times 1 (=1). The binary number 10 is the same as the decimal number 2. The binary number 101 is the same as the decimal number 5.
Names of numbers.
When dealing with larger numbers than this there are two different ways of naming the numbers in English. Under the 'long scale' a new name is given every time the number is a million times larger than the last named number. It is also called the 'British Standard'. This scale used to be common in Britain but is not often used in English speaking countries today. It is still used in some other European nations. Another scale is the 'short scale' under which a new name is given every time a number is a thousand times larger than the last named number. This scale is a lot more common in most English speaking nations today.
Natural numbers.
Natural numbers are the numbers which we normally use for counting, 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 etc. Some people call these counting numbers. Some people say that 0 is a natural number, too.
Another name for these numbers is positive numbers. These numbers are sometimes written as +1 to show that they are different from the negative numbers. But not all positive numbers are natural (for example formula_1 is positive, but not natural).
Negative numbers.
Negative numbers are numbers less than zero.
One way to think of negative numbers is using a "number line". We call one point on this line zero. Then we will label (write the name of) every position on the line by how far to the right of the zero point it is, for example the point one is one centimeter to the right, the point two is two centimeters to the right.
Now think about a point which is one centimeter to the left of the zero point. We cannot call this point one, as there is already a point called one. We therefore call this point minus 1 (-1) (as it is one centimeter away, but in the opposite direction).
A drawing of a number line is below.
If people add a negative number to another this is the same as taking away the positive number with the same numerals. For example 5 + (-3) is the same as 5 - 3, and equals 2.
If they take away a negative number from another this is the same as adding the positive number with the same numerals. For example 5 - (-3) is the same as 5 + 3, and equals 8.
If they multiply two negative numbers together they get a positive number. For example -5 times -3 is 15.
If they multiply a negative number by a positive number, or multiply a positive number by a negative number, they get a negative result. For example 5 times -3 is -15.
Integers.
Integers are all the natural numbers, all their opposites, and the number zero.
Rational numbers.
Rational numbers are numbers which can be written as fractions. This means that they can be written as "a" divided by "b", where the numbers "a" and "b" are integers, and "b" is not equal to 0.
Some rational numbers, such as 1/10, need a finite number of digits after the decimal point to write them in decimal form. The number one tenth is written in decimal form as 0.1. Numbers written with a finite decimal form are rational. Some rational numbers, such as 1/11, need an infinite number of digits after the decimal point to write them in decimal form. There is a repeating pattern to the digits following the decimal point. The number one eleventh is written in decimal form as 0.0909090909...
Irrational numbers.
Irrational numbers are numbers which cannot be written as a fraction, but do not have imaginary parts.
Irrational numbers often occur in geometry. Irrational numbers are often refer to as "J" for its symbol. For instance if we have a square which has sides of 1 meter, the distance between opposite corners is the square root of two. This is an irrational number. In decimal for it is written as 1.414213... Mathematicians have proved that the square root of every natural number is either an integer or an irrational number.
One well known irrational number is pi. This is the circumference of a circle divided by its diameter. This number is the same for every circle. The number pi is approximately 3.1415926359....
An irrational number cannot be fully written down in decimal form. It would have an infinite number of digits after the decimal point. These digits would also not repeat.
Real numbers.
Real numbers is a name for all the sets of numbers listed above
This is all numbers but for imaginary numbers.
Imaginary numbers.
Imaginary numbers are formed by real numbers multiplied by the number i. This number is the square root of minus one (-1).
There is no number in the real numbers which when squared makes the number -1. Therefore mathematicians invented a number. They called this number i, or the imaginary unit.
Imaginary numbers were called "imaginary" because when they were first found many mathematicians did not think they existed. The person who "discovered" imaginary numbers was Gerolamo Cardano in the 1500s. The first to use the word "imaginary number" was René Descartes. The first people to use these numbers were Leonard Euler and Carl Friedrich Gauss. Both lived in the 18th century.
Complex numbers.
Complex numbers are numbers which have two parts; a "real" part and an "imaginary" part. Every type of number written above is also a complex number.
Complex numbers are a more general form of numbers. Every equation can be solved using only complex numbers.
The complex numbers can be drawn on a number plane. This is composed of a real number line, and an imaginary number line.
3i|_
2i|_. 2+2i
i|_
-2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
-i|_.3-i
.-2-2i -2i|_
-3i|_
To multiply two complex numbers is complicated. It is easiest to describe in general terms, with two complex numbers a + bi and c + di.
formula_2
For example (4 + 5i) × (3 + 2i) = (4 × 3 - 5 × 2) + (4 × 2 + 5 × 3)i = (12 - 10) + (8 + 15)i = 2 + 23i.
Transcendental numbers.
A real or complex number is called "Transcendental number" if it cannot be obtained as a result of an algebraic equation with integer coefficients.
formula_3
Proving that a certain number is transcendental can be extremely difficult. Each transcendental number is also an irrational number. The first people to see that there were transcendental numbers were Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Leonhard Euler. The first to actually prove there were transcendental numbers was Joseph Liouville. He did this in 1844.
