Noah's Ark, according to the Book of Genesis (–) in the Bible, was a ship that saved Noah and the other seven members of his family from the Great Flood. According to the story, it later rested on Mount Ararat, Turkey.
The size of the ship was 300 by 50 by 30 ells, according to Genesis. This makes it about half the size of the ship Queen Elizabeth 2, or 133 by 22, by 13 metres. It would have had about the same tonnage (weight) as the Titanic. It was much bigger than any ship of that time. Very probably, the wood used was that of the cypress tree.
Nothing has been found that could seem to show that the ark rested on Mount Ararat. All findings were quickly shown as being fake. For this reason, many theologians have come to see the story of the flood as a myth, that should not be understood literally. In spite of this, many Christian movements, like the Eastern Orthodox Church and Seventh-day Adventist Church still keep a literal reading.
Naturalist approaches.
There are also some problems with the way the story is understood, that started during Renaissance. The mythological creature called the Phoenix is unique (only one ever existed). How can there have been two of them? - And the Sirens. that lure sailors into their doom, were they taken onboard, too?- A popular solution was, that they swam outside. And the Bird of Paradise must have flown around the ark endlessly, because it had no feet to land.
At the same time, a new kind of scholarship arose. These people never questioned the literal truth of the Ark story. They began to think about it from a practical point of view. In the 15th century, Alfonso Tostada told about the logic of the Ark, including things such as arrangements for the getting rid of dung and the circulation of fresh air. The well-known 16th-century geometrician Johannes Buteo worked out the ship's internal dimensions. He also allowed room for Noah's grinding mills and smokeless ovens. Other people also used his model, later on.
By the 17th century, America had been discovered and was being explored. This led to new problems. All the species had to be spread again from one point, after the flood. The obvious answer was that man had spread over the continents after the destruction of the Tower of Babel. The different groups took animals with them. Some of the results seemed peculiar, though: "why had the natives of North America taken rattlesnakes, but not horses", wondered Sir Thomas Browne in 1646? "How America abounded with Beasts of prey and noxious Animals, yet contained not in that necessary Creature, a Horse, is very strange."
Browne was among the first people to question the notion of spontaneous generation. He was a medical doctor and amateur scientist making this observation in passing. Biblical scholars of the time such as Justus Lipsius (1547–1606) and Athanasius Kircher (c.1601–80) were also beginning to look at the Ark story more closely. They tried to reconcile the Biblical account with natural historical knowledge of their time. The resulting hypotheses were important. They were a driving force behind the study of the geographical distribution of plants and animals. They indirectly helped the development of biogeography in the 18th century. Natural historians began to draw connections between climates and the animals and plants adapted to them. One important theory said that the biblical Ararat was striped with different climatic zones. When climate changed, the associated animals moved as well. Eventually they spread to repopulate the globe. There was also the problem of an ever-expanding number of known species: for Kircher and earlier natural historians, there was little problem finding room for all known animal species in the Ark, but by the time John Ray (1627–1705) was working, just several decades after Kircher, their number had increased dramatically. Incorporating the full range of animal diversity into the Ark story was becoming increasingly difficult, and by 1700 few natural historians could see any reasons to believe in a literal interpretation of the Noah's Ark narrative.
