The Neolithic Revolution was the first agricultural revolution—the transition from nomadic hunting and gathering communities and bands to agriculture and settlement. It occurred in different prehistoric human societies at different times. Most societies changed 12–10 thousand years ago.
Needed changes.
The term refers to both the general time period over which these developments took place and the following changes to Neolithic human societies which are associated with, the adoption of early farming techniques, crop cultivation, and the domestication of animals.
The Neolithic Revolution is important for developments in social organization and technology. The changes most often associated with the Neolithic Revolution include an increased tendency to live in permanent or semi-permanent settlements. Because of this fewer people led a nomadic lifestyle. To be able to know who the crops grown belonged to, the concept of land ownership needed to be developed. Modifications to the natural environment, the ability to sustain higher population densities, an increased reliance on vegetable and cereal foods in the total diet, the development of hierarchy in society and of "trading economies" that use surplus production from increasing crop yields are other changes often cited.
General process.
When humans started to domesticate crops, and certain animals such as dogs, goats, sheep, and cattle, human society changed. Because people now grew crops and raised livestock they no longer needed to move around that much. They could build better settlements. Their diet also changed. It included more cereals and vegetables. People also started to keep and manage some foods - it was not advisable to eat all grain seeds, because then there would be no seeds left to plant the next year. Also, as there were surpluses in some years, these could be traded for other goods with other people.
These changes happened in several places of the world, independently. They did not happen in the same order though. The earliest farming societies in the Near East did not use pottery.It is still unclear, to what extent plants were domesticated in Britain, or if permanently settled communities existed at all. Early Japanese societies used pottery "before" developing agriculture.
In the Paleolithic there were many different human species. According to current research, only the modern human reached the Neolithic though.
Vere Gordon Childe gave the name "Neolithic Revolution" to this process in the 1920s. He thought that it was as important as the Industrial Revolution (which happened in the 18th and 19th century).
