NASA or the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is the part of the United States government that deals with space exploration and aeronautics, the operating and designing of planes. NASA has had many successful missions inlcuding the ISS and Apollo 11 which put the first man on the Moon in 1969. NASA started on July 29, 1958. NASA's motto is: "For the benefit of all".
Founding and the Sputnik crisis.
NASA was founded in 1958 to compete with the Soviet Union in the space race. A space race is a period in history when two countries compete or have a race to explore space. A space race can be for reasons of war or just for exploration. In the 1950s and 60s there was a space race between the USA and the Soviet Union - now called Russia. The Soviets started first launching Sputnik 1, the first object made by people to enter space, in October 1957. The Americans were worried by this. It caused a crisis known as the Sputnik Crisis as the Americans feared the Russians might start building weapons in space. This all happened at a time called the Cold War when the USA and the Soviet Union were always very close to war.
The Mercury Project.
Originally NASA was very small with only four laboratories and around eighty people working there. In 1960 they set up the Mercury project. The Mercury Project was a series of space missions designed by NASA. They were mostly to test if humans could survive in space. After they proved it was possible for people to live in space they moved on. They recruited a German engineer and scientist called Wernher von Braun to help build their rockets. Von Braun had worked to help the Nazis build test rockets during World War II. On May 15th 1961 astronaut Alan Shepard became the first American in space. Less than a year later John Glenn became the first American to orbit or circle the Earth, in a spacecraft called Friendship 7. Once the Mercury Project proved that humans could live in space the Gemini Project was started. But less than year after it began it was replaced with the Apollo Program.
The Apollo Program.
The Apollo Program was started by President John F Kennedy in the 1960s. The program was made of 16 missions designed to send a man to the Moon and return him safely back to Earth. The first apollo mission, Apollo 1, ended in disaster when a fire in the command module killed all the astronauts onboard.
The Apollo 8 and 9 missions went to the moon. They tested equipment and took photos but did not land. The projects main success came in 1969 when Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed on the Moon as part of Apollo 11. The mission was a big success for NASA and over six million people watched it worldwide.
The Space Shuttle era.
In the 1980s and 90's NASA began to concentrate on building Space Shuttles. Four Shuttles were built by 1985. The first to launch was the space shuttle Columbia in October 1981. At this time the public began to lose interest in the space program and NASA faced budget cuts. They had planned for the space shuttles to cost less as they could be used more than once. But eventually it turned out the Space Shuttles were more expensive as building them in the first place cost more money than normal. There was further problems for NASA after the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded while in mid-air over the Atlantic Ocean, near Florida. All eight astronauts on board died in the explosion. The incident is known as the Challenger disaster.
The Challenger disaster forced NASA to think about the way they worked. The entire Space Shuttle fleet was suspended for a year after the disaster. It was also around this time that NASA launched the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit.
NASA also now works with the Russian space agency quite often. When the Space Shuttle fleet was grounded after the Columbia disaster in 2003 Russian rockets continued to take up parts to the International Space Station. Costing over 10 billion dollars so far NASA has lost much public interest in this project.
NASA's future.
NASA's continuing operations include missions to the planets Mars, Saturn and Pluto. Missions to Jupiter are also planned for the near future. The spacecraft flew past Jupiter in February 2007, studying some of the planets moons. On July 14 2015 the craft will fly by Pluto, take high resolution pictures of the planet's surface and analyse the chemical properties of its atmosphere or air.
NASA announced in 2004 that they plan to have a permanent Moon base by 2020. A senior NASA adminstrator also stated in 2007 that NASA aims "to put a man on Mars by 2037".
NASA Missions.
NASA has launched over 500 missions in its 50-year history. There have been over 150 missions with humans onboard or "manned" missions. NASA spacecraft such as Cassini-Huygens and the Voyager program have visited every planet in the Solar System. Four NASA spacecraft have left the Solar System, Voyager 1, Voyager 2, Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11. As of 2008 Voyager 2 is 106.922 AU or around 12,000,000,000 miles away from Earth.
