The Necronomicon is a fictional book of magic created by the horror writer H. P. Lovecraft. According to Lovecraft, the Necronomicon (which is Latin for "book of dead names;" it is pronounced "neck-ro-nom-ih-kon") was written in the eighth century by a crazy Arabian man named Abdul Alhazred. Alhazred (who was also fictional) practiced black magic (a kind of magic that is used for evil instead of good), and compiled (assembled) a collection of dark spells into a manuscript (an unbound book--a book in which all the pages are loose and there is no cover) which he called Al Azif. Several years later, the story goes, the original manuscript was discovered by a British publisher named Olaus Wormnius (who actually was a real person, although he never really discovered the Necronomicon--Lovecraft made that up), who published it as a grimoire (pronounced "grim-war," which is a book of spells) and gave it the title "Necronomicon."
Since Lovecraft's death, several authors have written their own versions of the Necronomicon. Most of them are the author's imagination of what the Necronomicon would be like if it were real, but a few claim to be the actual Necronomicon. The most famous case of a "real" Necronomicon is the "Simon" Necronomicon, which a young man who uses the pen name (a fake name used by authors) Simon claimed to have discovered in the early 1970's. Simon's Necronomicon is actually based on Arabian mythology, which he claims has similarities to H. P. Lovecraft's fiction. There are several people who denounce the "Simon" Necronomicon (denounce means to say that something is not true), but many people believe it to be the real Necronomicon and have bought it.
Simon has written several books about the Necronomicon's "discovery" since its publication in 1974, such as the popular "Dead Names: The Dark History of the Necronomicon," which is about his life and how he "discovered" the book. Several people claim that not all of what Simon says in "Dead Names" is true, although most of the people and events mentioned in it were real (such as Peter Levenda, a real author whom Simon states as being involved in the translation of the Necronomicon from Arabic to English, and the Son of Sam murders, real serial killings that took place in New York City in the '70s--see serial killer). Since Simon keeps his true identity a secret, Peter Levenda often does interviews for him, answering questions about the Necronomicon and Simon's books.
