Namli Maira is one of the 51 Union Councils of Abbottabad District in the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan.
2005 earthquake.
The 8 October 2005, was one of the worst days in the history of Pakistan. An Earthquake of magnitude 7.6 struck the Northern Areas as well as Kashmir. The quake brought huge destruction. Namli Maira was partially damaged, but the aftershocks were felt in this area even in December. Houses were damaged but the death toll was very low.
Location.
Namli Maira is situated between 34° 07.33' N, 073° 23.00' E in Abbottabad District. The Union Council is a collection of small hamlets, and takes it name from the largest two i.e. Namli and Maira. These settlements are nestled on mountains about 20 kilometres from the city of Abbottabad. Miranjani the highest peak of the area is also in Namli Maira.
From Mera Jani, Azad Kashmir, River Jhelum, (Kohala) Tarbela lake, Abbottabad city, Havelian and other far places can easily be seen.
Namli Maira is mainly a mountainous rural area. The nearest city to people living in Namli Maira is Abbottabad which is also its Tehsil & District capital.
Administration.
The Union Council is administratively divided into the following areas Dhaki Khaitar, Namli Maira, Noormang and Pangoora.
People.
The majority of the people of Namli Maira belong to the Karlal tribes, other tribes in this area are: Turks, Mughal, Malik and Awan and Abbasi, although they are in a minority. People are religious and are all Muslims.
Fruits.
Fruit like pear, apple, black grapes, grapes, fig, peach, damson plum, mulberry, wild fig, lemon, apricot are find in abundance in Namli Maira. As the hill people lack awareness about the markets, they are unable to get a proper return. These fruits only meet the requirement of local people.
Forests.
Most of the area of these hilly hamlets villages are covered with trees. Peaks are covered with evergreen trees including pine, walnut, oak and maple trees. Herbs, shrubs, wild flowers and thorny bushes can be seen in abundance. Goats and other pet animals grassing in pastures. People used forest wood as fuel for daily use and also for homes construction.
Education.
Literacy Rate: Namli Maira village has one of the highest literacy rates for the district. The literacy rate of Namli Maira is about 75%. Girls and boys both type of school are found here. There are Primary schools for boys and girls, Government Boys High School, Girls High school. Private English Medium School (Model Public School Namli run by sir Tariq)are also located here - these account for the high literacy rate.
As this is away from city only a day trip is recommended for tourists. There is no over night stay facility here.
