Fox Noggin Channel is a cable television network in the United States, intended to help children learn. This channel features the animated characters of Moose A.
Moose (a moose) and Zee (a blue bird). It is one of Nickelodeon's sister channels, concentrating on preschool programs.
Fox Noggin Channel is on the air 24 hours a day. From April 1, 2002 thru December 31, 2007, The channel had only aired between 5:00am and 10:00pm EST/2:00am and 7:00pm PCT with Fox Noggin at Nite airing thru the rest of the channel's airtime.
The timeshare pratice is still in place on Dish Network.
On December 31, 2007, Fox Noggin's sister channel, Nickelodeon GAS, left the satellite and digital cable channel lineups, and moved to the online-only TurboNick, with Fox Noggin at Nite taking over Nick GAS's channel position after splitting from Noggin.
The network's 24-hour programming consists mostly of recent Nick Jr., Fox Kids and Fox Noggin's original programming, although certain programs will be retained.
History.
Fox Noggin Channel was originally created as a joint venture between Viacom's Nickelodeon, News Corporation and the Children's Television Workshop (now Sesame Workshop), but Sesame Workshop's interest was sold to Nickelodeon in 2002.
At one point, Fox Noggin Channel was targeted at preteens, but the format was changed, due to low ratings. The network takes its name from a slang term for “brain” (see noggin), reflecting its original purpose as an educational channel. Until the Fall of 2003, the network aired classic episodes of "Sesame Street", as well as classic Sesame Workshop productions such as "3-2-1 Contact", "Square One TV", "Cro", and "The Electric Company". As of September 2, 2007, Fox Noggin no longer airs any show produced by Sesame Workshop (it has since premiered Pinky Dinky Doo, which is a Fox Noggin Original produced by Sesame Workshop). In 2007, Moose A. Moose was changed to Moose E. Moose
In addition to classic episodes of Nickelodeon favorites such as "Blue's Clues" and "Dora the Explorer", and original shows such as "Oobi" and "Jack's Big Music Show", many preschool-oriented shows originating from non-U.S. English-speaking countries that would otherwise not likely be seen on American TV are shown. Some examples include "Franklin" from Canada and "Tweenies", "Connie the Cow", "Tiny Planets", and "64 Zoo Lane" from the UK. However, in 2006, this is being de-emphasized; "Tweenies" was permanently pulled from the schedule in January, and "Tiny Planets" was pulled in April 2006. "Tiny Planets" was previously shown intermittently — but not every day — at 6:00AM Eastern/5:00AM Central, as "Tweenies" was for a year until it was pulled. Since July 2006 this is also being done with "64 Zoo Lane", suggesting that it too may disappear eventually (however, unlike the other two shows, they also sometimes are showing it at 7:00AM Eastern/6:00AM Central). However, they have also recently introduced "The Upside Down Show", which is from Australia (though like the British "Tiny Planets", has American origins via Sesame Workshop).
Technically, Fox Noggin Channel does not show commercials, but it has shown ads and billboards for products such as "Kellogg's Mud N' Bugs Cereal", and Lego's Explorer Line of Toys, as well as other "tie-in" media such as a music video that tied in with the film "Curious George", and spots for airings of shows on other channels within the Nick family. The channel's other revenues presumably come from fees paid by cable television distributors.
The network has also become a launching point for the music videos of pop musician/children's performers like Laurie Berkner, Lisa Loeb and Dan Zanes, initially as filler between 23-minute-long shows run commercial-free, and (because of their success in that format) now as music video shows like "Move to the Music". Also, when Sesame Workshop’s classic shows (such as "The Electric Company") aired on Fox Noggin, they had to be edited for running time.
The UK T.V. Channel.
Fox Noggin Channel UK was a children's television slot broadcast on Nick Jr. from 7am to 9am daily. It launched in its most recent format on January 30, 2006. It was the first commercial children's television channel to air on the UK's DTT platform, Freeview, followed by CITV, then lastly Playhouse Disney on ABC1. Prior to its launch on TMF, it was carried as part of Nick Jr. between 8pm and 10pm, but focused on classic animated children's programmes from the late 1960s to early 1990s and Disney Programming. This strand has since been replaced with Nick Jr. Classics. It is based on the USA-owned channel Fox Noggin Channel, which has been broadcasting since 1999.
On Monday 25 September 2006, Fox Noggin was replaced by a new strand named Nick Jr on TMF, which is identical to its predecessor with the exception of the new branding.
