Edward "Ned" Kelly (June 3 1855 – November 11 1880) was Australia's most famous bushranger and leader of the Kelly Gang. As a young man he was often in trouble with the police. Following a problem at his home in 1878, the police searched for him in the bush. After he murdered three policemen, the government made Ned and his gang wanted outlaws. A final violent fight with police took place at Glenrowan. Kelly, dressed in home-made metal armour and helmet, was captured and sent to trial. He was hanged for murder at the Melbourne gaol (jail) in 1880. He has become a symbolic figure in Australian history, folklore, books, art and film.
Early Life.
Edward 'Ned' Kelly was born at Beveridge in 1855. He was the son of Irish Catholic parents, John "Red" Kelly and Ellen Quinn. Red Kelly had been a convict. He had been sent to Van Diemen's Land in 1842 for stealing 2 pigs. He moved to Victoria in 1848. He met Ellen Quinn, who had come to Victoria from Ireland with her family in 1841. Red started working for Ellen's father, James Quinn, farming at Beveridge, north of Melbourne. When Ned was about 9 the family moved north to Avenel. Ned saved a boy, Richard Shelton, from drowning in Hughes Creek and was given a green silk sash for his bravery. He was wearing this sash under his armour when he was captured. Red wasn't a successful farmer and was soon arrested for stealing cattle. He was given 1 month in prison and had to pay a fine of 25 pounds. He died soon after.
Greta.
The family moved to a hut at Eleven Mile Creek in north-east Victoria, between Greta and Glenrowan. There were other members of Ellen's family, the her brothers James, William and John Quinn, and her brothers in law (Lloyds), living in the area. Some of them had been sent to prison for cattle stealing. James had been charged 10 times for cattle stealing.. The police thought the family were trouble makers. Ned Kelly started work cutting down trees, breaking in horses, herding cattle and putting up fences. Ned Kelly knew about bushrangers including the story of Ben Hall.
Gaol.
On October 14, 1869, 14 year old Ned was arrested for stealing money from a Chinese man. He spent 10 days in the police station lockup. There was not enough proof to send Ned to court. Ned also worked in the bush with an ex convict Harry Power. Power had escaped from a Melbourne gaol and started bushranging. Kelly was arrested in May 1870 for helping Power to rob people. He was kept in the gaol at Kyneton for 7 weeks. Soon after this Ned was in trouble again. With his uncle, Jack Lloyd, Ned had got into a fight with a hawker (traveling salesman). They then sent a rude letter and some calf's testicles to the hawker's wife. In October 1870 he was sent to Beechworth gaol for assault and for being rude to a lady. He spent 5 months in gaol.
Just 3 weeks after getting out of gaol in April 1871, 16 year old Ned was arrested again. He had ridden a friend's horse into Greta. He didn't know that the friend, "Wild Wright", had stolen the horse from the Mansfield post office. There was a fight when Constable Hall tried to arrest him. Hall tried to shoot Kelly but his gun didn't work. Kelly was sent to Pentridge Gaol in Melbourne. After 4 month he was moved to the prison hulk, "Sacramento", at Williamstown, Victoria.. The prison hulks were old ships that were used as extra prison space. Ned would have worked during the day on building a sea wall at Williamstown beach. He was released in February 1874. Kelly became famous when he beat Wild Wright in a fight. It was a bare knuckle boxing match that lasted for 20 rounds. In 1877 he was arrested again in Benalla, for being drunk, riding on a footpath and resisting arrest.. One of the policeman involved in the fight to arrest Kelly was Thomas Lonigan. Lonigan was later shot dead by Kelly at Stringybark Creek.
The Fitzpatrick Incident.
Constable Fitzpatrick was in charge of the Greta Police Station. He had been told to stay away from the Kellys. All the Kelly family were well known to the police. The police had been told only to go to the Kelly's house in pairs. Instead Fitzpatrick said he would 'fix the Greta mob'. In April 1878 he went to arrest Ned and his brother Dan for horse stealing. Dan had only been recently let out of gaol. At the hut, Fitzpatrick tried to sexually assault (hurt) Kate, Ned's older sister. In a small fight, Fitzpatrick hurt his wrist. He was probably drunk, and he and Ellen agreed to forget what had happened. Fitzpatrick went back to the police station and made up a new story. He said Ned had shot at him 3 times. The Kellys said that Ned was working 400 miles away. Ellen Kelly was sentenced by Judge Redmond Barry to 3 years in gaol for trying to kill Constable Fitzpatrick. Judge Barry said he would give Ned 21 years in gaol if the police could catch him. The police offered a reward of £100 for the capture of the Kelly brothers. Fitzpatrick was later sacked from the police as a "liar".
Stringybark Creek.
Dan and Ned Kelly went into hiding in the bush. They were later joined by 2 friends Joe Byrne and Steve Hart. On 25 October 1878, 2 groups of police set out to find the Kellys. They knew Ned and Dan were hiding in the Wombat Ranges north of Mansfield. One group started south from Greta led by Senior Constable Strahan. Strahan said he would shoot the Kellys down like dogs. A second group led by Sergeant Michael Kennedy set off from Mansfield heading north. Three other policemen were with him; Constables Thomas McIntyre, Thomas Lonigan, and Michael Scanlon. They set up a camp at Stringybark Creek in a thick forest area.
Kennedy and Scanlon went searching for the Kellys, while Lonigan and McIntyre remained at the camp. The Kellys were camped in the bush nearby. They heard noises from the police camp. They decided to capture the policemen and steal their guns and horses. Ned and Dan went to the police camp and told them to surrender. Constable McIntyre put his arms up but Lonigan got out his gun. Ned Kelly shot him dead. When the other two police returned to camp, McIntyre told them to surrender. Scanlon went for his gun but Ned shot him dead. Kennedy ran shooting from tree to tree with Ned chasing him. During the shooting Kennedy was shot and was badly wounded. Ned shot him again to end his suffering.. McIntyre was able to escape during the confusion.
The Victorian government passed a law on 30 October 1878 to make the Kelly gang outlaws, they no longer had any legal rights. They could be shot by anyone. Anyone who could capture one of the gang alive or dead, would be paid a reward of 500 pounds. The gang were seen at several locations around north eastern Victoria. They had tried to cross the Murray River but it was too deep. The police had several large groups hunting for them.
Euroa.
On the 10 December 1878, the gang robbed the National Bank at Euroa. They had stopped at Faithful Creek station (farm) and held the people there prisoners. They locked 22 people including farm workers, hawkers (traveling salesmen) and visitors into a storeroom. Joe Byrne kept guard while the rest of the gang went into Euroa. They went to the bank and said they had a message from McCauley, the farm manager. They got into the bank and held up the bank manager, Scott, and his two tellers (bank workers). After taking all the money, the gang forced Scott, his wife, family, maids and tellers to go with them back to Faithful Creek. They were locked up with the other hostages.
The outlaws gave a display of horse riding and tricks which entertained and surprised their hostages. After having supper, and telling the hostages not to leave the farm for another 3 hours, they left. The crime was carried out without injury and the gang stole £2000, a large sum in those days.
Jerilderie.
The police increased the reward on the Kelly Gang. More police were sent to guard banks in the country. Friends of the Kellys were locked in gaol. The gang crossed the Murray River and rode 60 km north into New South Wales. They arrived in Jerilderie on Saturday 8 February 1879. They broke into the local police station and locked policemen Richards and Devine in their own cell. The outlaws changed into the police uniforms and mixed with the local people. They said they were extra police from Sydney to guard the town from the Kelly gang. On Monday the gang rounded up various people and forced them into the back room of the Royal Mail Hotel. While Dan Kelly and Steve Hart kept the hostages busy with "drinks on the house", Ned Kelly and Joe Byrne robbed the local bank of about £2414. Kelly also burned all the townspeople's mortgage deeds in the bank. When the gang left the town they were singing a song about 2 earlier bushrangers, Ben Hall and Dan Morgan: "Hurrah for the good old times of Morgan and Ben Hall."
The Jerilderie Letter.
Months before going to Jerilderie, and with help from Joe Byrne, Ned Kelly dictated a long letter (56 pages). The letter told his story, about how he became a bushranger, and the treatment of his family by the police. It also told the story of the treatment of Irish Catholics by the police and the English and Irish Protestant squatters. He even said there might be a revolution by people in north east Victoria to set up their own republic.
The Jerilderie Letter, as it is called, is a document of roughly 8,300 words and has become a famous piece of Australian literature. Kelly had written an earlier letter (14 December 1878) to a member of Parliament, but it had been ignored. The Jerilderie letter was never published. Kelly tried to find the editor of the local newspaper, but he finally gave the letter to Edward Living, a teller at the bank. The letter wasn't re-discovered until 1930. It was then published by the "Melbourne Herald". The handwritten letter was given to the State Library of Victoria in 2000. Kelly's language is colorful, rough and full of metaphors. He described the police as being "...big ugly fat-necked wombat headed big bellied magpie legged narrow hipped splay footed sons of Irish bailiffs or English landlords..."
Glenrowan.
File:Ned kelly armour library.JPG|thumb|Ned Kelly's armour
The gang discovered that Aaron Sherritt, Joe Byrne's best friend, was a police spy. On the 26 June 1880 Dan Kelly and Joe Byrne went to Sherritt's house and killed him. The 4 policemen who were protecting him at the time hid under the bed and did not report the murder until the next day. The Kelly Gang arrived in Glenrowan on 27 June and took 70 hostages at the Glenrowan Inn (hotel). They knew that a train loaded with police was on its way. They had the rail tracks pulled up in order to cause a the train to crash. While waiting for the train the outlaws held a dance in the Inn.
The gang members put on their armour. It was made from plough parts. Each man's armour weighed about 96 pounds (44 kg); all 4 had helmets.
The Kelly gang's attempt to derail the police train failed. Local school teacher, Thomas Curnow, talked Ned into letting him go. As soon as he was free he stood on the railway line waving a lantern (light) wrapped in his red scarf. The train stopped safely. The 46 policemen on the train went to the inn. They fired their guns into the building for 7 hours.
At dawn on Monday 28 June, Ned Kelly came out of the inn wearing his armour. He marched towards the police, firing his gun at them. Their bullets bounced off his armour. He was was shot in his legs that armour did not cover. The other Kelly Gang members died in the hotel. Joe Byrne died from loss of blood because a gunshot cut his femoral artery. Dan Kelly and Steve Hart killed themselves. The police had one minor injury; Superintendent Francis Hare received a small wound to his wrist, then fled the battle. For running away the Royal Commission later removed Hare from the Victorian Police Force. Several hostages were shot, and 3 died, including 13 year old Jack Jones.
Trial.
Ned Kelly survived to stand trial, and was sentenced to death by the Irish-born judge Sir Redmond Barry. Barry said the words "May God have mercy on your soul" and sentenced Kelly to death. Kelly said "I will go a little further than that, and say I will see you there when I go". Many people did not think Kelly should die. A petition with more than 60,000 names asked for mercy. He was hanged on 11 November at the Melbourne Gaol for murder. Two newspapers ("The Age" and "The Herald") reported Kelly's last words as "Such is life". Sir Redmond Barry died of the effects of a carbuncle on his neck on 23 November, 1880, twelve days after Kelly.
Books, Music, Art and Movies.
The story of Ned Kelly has been told many times in books, in music and song, in works of art, and in a number of movies.
