Otters are animals that live near and around water. They are a part of the animal family Mustelid. A group of otters are called a "romp", because they play together and are energetic. They live in nests are called holts. There are many different kinds of otters, some live near rivers, some in the sea (Sea Otters). Otters live in most parts of the world, except for Australia and Antarctica.
Description.
Otters are long and slim animals with four short legs that can be longer than a meter. They usually stay on all four legs, but they can stand up as well but they are expert swimmers and spend a lot of time in water. They have a thick fur coat that keeps them warm even in freezing water. Their fur is often brown at the top, and lighter on the bottom of the Otter. They eat meat and hunt for fish and small animals, so they have sharp claws and teeth that allow them to catch prey, then eat them. They are great swimmers and divers; they can stay underwater for 8 minutes. Their thick and long tail helps them steer while swimming underwater. Also, their feet are webbed, which helps them swim. On they ground, they can run very fast.
Otters live 8 to 9 years in the wild, and as many as 21 years when living with people.
Diet.
Otters are carnivores; they must eat a lot of meat to live, so they spend 3 to 5 hours per day fishing and hunting. They can die of hunger more quickly than most animals. They eat fish, crayfish, crabs, and frogs. They will eat any small animals and birds they can catch. Much of their food is found in water. They dive in rivers, lakes and streams until they can find a suitable animal to eat, which they then chase. Once they catch it, they bring it to the top of the water, where they eat it. If the animal has a hard shell, Otters can use a rock as a tool to break open the shell.
Behavior.
Otters are playful and energetic. They can be seen sliding down hills and slopes, as well as chasing other otters for fun. Some kinds of otters live in groups, while others are almost always alone. Because they spent so much time in cold water, they have to groom their fur often to stop themselves from freezing.
Communication.
Otters talk to other animals and otters with whistles, growls, chuckles and screams, as well as chirps, squeals, and some kinds of otters might even purr. They also leave their smell on plants so that other animals can know where an otters territory is..
