Omega SA is Swiss watch manufacturer that belongs to the Swatch Group of companies. It is located in Biel-Bienne (Switzerland). Omega SA produces watches of a high standard. It was founded in 1848 by Louis Brandt in La Chaux-de-Fonds (Switzerland). There are many famous people that promote Omega SA like Michael Schuhmacher, George Clooney, Cindy Crawford and Nicole Kidman.
History.
The beginning of Omega was 1848 in La Chaux-de-Fonds. Louis Brandt opened a factory, that produces watches. The watches made there, carried the name Louis Brandt. After the death of Brandt, his sons transfered the production to Bienne (Switzerland). There, they started to produce their watches industrially. Already in 1898 "Louis Brandt & frères" employed more than 500 workers.
1894 they changed their name into Omega, when they released a whatch, named Omega. This name should show the quality of that watch, because Omega is the last letter of the greek alphabet and means "perfection".
In 1904 finally, the Brandt brothers died, and the company came into the hands of their children. In the following years, Omega became a highly prestigious watch manufacturer. In 1925 Omega started to work with Tissot, another watch manufacturer.
Today Omega belongs to the Swatch Group.
James Bond.
Omega watches are in great demand, by great filmmakers for their films. So, for exemple, Pierce Brosnan (alias James Bond)started to wear an Omega Seamaster Quartz Professional in the film "Golden Eye". In all later Films, Brosnan wore an Omega Seamaster Professional Chronometer.
Also Daniel Craig, latest Bond actor, wears Omega in his films. It even goes so far, that he mentions his watch manufacturer by name in the film.
Sports.
At the moment, Omega SA is the official timekeeper for the Olympic Games. Their first time was 1932 at Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. They have been timekeeper in 2006 Winter Olympics, and will do the same at 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouover.
As a sponsor for the Emirates Team New Zealand, Omega introduced the Seamaster NZL-32 chronograph in 2007. The name is the same as the name of the boat, that won America's Cup in 1995.
