An operating system is what is needed to run the programs on a computer. It makes the link between programs and hardware. Windows and Mac OS X are popular operating systems. Less popular, but important, are operating systems like Linux, Unix, and Solaris.
An operating system is a mixture of different parts: (these can change depending on the operating system)
What an operating system does.
Most casual computer users take their operating system for granted. The easiest way to understand what an operating system does is to take a close look at what computers were like before operating systmes were invented.
The earliest electronic computers did not have any operating system. If the user wanted to change what the computer was doing, the user had to open the back panel on the (then very large) computer, and change how the wires were connected. Changing what the computer did was very time consuming and required an expert.
Later, computer scientists decided that it was better to have the wires stay as they were, and feed instructions to the computer with punch cards or magnetic tape. The computer would store the instructions in some kind of memory. This way of operating a computer is called the von Neumann architecture.
Still, computers of the time generally only had enough memory to "remember" one program at a time. If the user wanted the computer to run a different program, the user had to wipe out the first program from memory and then load another program into memory.
Computer operators and computer scientists grew tired of carrying around large stacks of punch cards. They also wanted their computers to run more than one program at a time. As the memory capabilities of computers got better over the years, they decided that it would be better if the computer could hold several programs in its memory. The computer user could then simply choose which program they wanted to run. Running a computer this way requires a "boss" program that controls all the other program, and asks the user what program they want to run. Such a boss program is called an operating system.
Having several progams in memory that can be run at any time presents some new problems. The operating system itself has to remember where the programs are at in memory. The operating system also has to prevent two programs from fighting over which one gets to use the processor.
These days it is unthinkable to have a desktop computer without some kind of operating system. Operating systems generally start up automatically when the user turns on the computer.
