Public houses (better known as pubs) are businesses that serve alcoholic drinks such as beer and ale, to be consumed on-place. Many pubs also sell food such as fish and chips and meat pies.
Pubs are found in English-speaking countries such as England, Ireland, Scotland, Canada, and the United States. In villages and small towns in many parts of England, Ireland, and Scotland, pubs are the center of community life. Some pubs hire bands or singers to entertain patrons. If the pub offers rooms where people can sleep at night, it is usually called an inn.
Staff.
Pubs hire a variety of staff to do different jobs. Bartenders (also called "barmen" or "barmaids") at serve alcohol. Some pubs hire servers to bring drinks to people who are sitting at tables or in chairs. Some pubs also hire people to take away empty bottles and glasses.
Pubs that serve food have cooks, dishwashers, and servers to prepare, cook, and serve the food. Bands and singers who entertain patrons during the evening are usually not usually employees of the pub. Instead, the pub signs a contract with these entertainers, in which the entertainer promises to come to the pub on a specified day or night, in return for a sum of money.
Comparison with nightclubs.
Another type of business that serves alcohol is the nightclub. Like pubs, some nightclubs also serve food and have bands or singers as entertainers. However, nightclubs often have a much wider selection of alcoholic drinks than pubs. Most nightclubs sell a number of different brands of spirits, liqeurs, wine, sherry, and apertifs.
The bartenders (also called "barmen" or "barmaids") at nightclubs often make a much larger variety of mixed drinks than pubs. Mixed drinks are alcoholic drinks sthat consist of one or more types of alcohol (e.g., rum, vodka, whiskey, etc.) mixed with flavorings such as orange juice, cream, chocolate syrup, or soda. Many mixed drinks also include ice, crushed ice, or sliced lime. Some well-known mixed drinks include the martini, the "Rum and Coke", and the "screwdriver" (orange juice mixed with vodka).
