Pregnancy is when a female has an unborn baby inside her. A human pregnancy is usually nine months long. Pregnancy usually starts when a woman has sexual intercourse with a man. Her ovum (or egg) and his sperm (seed) come together and form a zygote (fertilized egg) inside her. The zygote grows into an embryo, which grows into a fetus. When the fetus is ready, it is born.
Pregnancy is divided into three parts called "trimesters". Each trimester is about three months long. During the first trimester, the woman often feels sick in her stomach and has to urinate often. During the second trimester, the woman's body starts to look pregnant, and her belly starts to stick out. During the third trimester, her belly sticks out even more, and the woman becomes even heavier. Many other things happen to the woman during pregnancy. At the end of a full pregnancy, the woman goes into labour, and her body lets the baby come out. When this happens, it is called "delivering a baby" or "giving birth". Labour can hurt a lot for the woman.
Pregnancy problems.
Sometimes during pregnancy, there are problems. A "miscarriage" (spontaneous abortion) is when the fetus comes out of the woman too early, and the pregnancy ends suddenly. There are also certain sicknesses caused by pregnancy. Sometimes women die from giving birth.
Abortion.
A pregnancy can also stop without the baby being born. This is called abortion. It can happen all by itself (for example because of problems with the baby or the mother). Doctors can also do it, in this case it is called "induced abortion". Different countries have laws regarding induced abortions. Some countries allow it, other do not. In still others, it is allowed, but only for certain circumstances (Such as the woman's pregnancy resulting from rape, or that it poses a threat to the life of the pregnant woman). People also have different opinions regarding abortion, very often, these are influenced by religious beliefs.
There are certain diseases which require stopping a pregnancy, to protect the health of the mother.
