Pop art is a type of art that was popular in the 1960s and 1950s. Some pop artists include Andy Warhol, Robert Indiana and Roy Lichtenstein.
Pop art is a visual art movement that appeared in the mid 1950s in Britain and in parallel in the late 1950s in the United States and which rose in the 60's to the dominate artistic art of expression. Pop art is one of the major art movements of the twentieth century. Characterized by themes and techniques drawn from popular mass culture, such as advertising and comic books, pop art is widely interpreted as either a reaction to the then-dominant ideas of abstract expressionism or an expansion upon them. Pop art, like pop music, aimed to employ images of popular as opposed to elitist culture in art, emphasizing the banal or kitschy elements of any given culture. It has also been defined by the artists' use of mechanical means of reproduction or rendering techniques that downplay the expressive hand of the artist. Pop art at times targeted a broad audience and often claimed to do so.
The motives are out of the everyday culture, the world of consume, the mass media and out of the advertisement. The artists often name pop art „ anti-art“, which turns to trivialities. The pop artists ask for absolute reality, that means, all the elements have to be clean and clear objects. The most forms were bordered with black lines as in comic books. The objects are often plane like at poster, so demonstrated without deepness. The colours are always clear, mostly used are achromatic and primitive colours. Banal objects of the everyday life get isolated and were modified alone or processed in collages. Pop art is a connection between reality and art, handled with abstract means. Some of their catchwords are: popular, consumable, cheap, funny and outstanding.
Much of pop art is considered very academic, as the unconventional organizational practices used often make it difficult for some to understand. Pop art and minimalism are considered to be the last modern art movements and so the precursors to postmodern art, or some of the earliest examples of postmodern art themselves.
