Premature birth is when a baby is born before the regular end of the pregnancy. In humans, a pregnancy normally lasts for 266 days. Most of the time this is calculated from the last menstrual period. This increases the normal length to 280 days (40 weeks). Doctors see babies which are born before the 37th week (calculated from the last menstrual period) as premature, Such babies are called "premies". In the United States, about 12 percent of the babies are born prematurely, that is about 1 in 8. In 2003, there were over 490,000 b such births. Worldwide rates of prematurity are more difficult to obtain. In developing regions there is often no professional medical care for these babies. This makes it difficult to tell how far along the pregnancy really was. For this reason, the World Health Organization tracks rates of low birth weight instead. In 2000, this occurred in 16.5 percent of births in less developed regions. It is estimated that one-third of these low birth weight deliveries are due to premature delivery.
Complications.
The risk of having a problem (called "complication") is higher in shorter pregnancies. Babies born prematurely die more often in their first year of life that others. Most die in their first month of life, which is called "neonatal mortality". Worldwide, prematurity accounts for 10% of neonatal mortality, or around 500,000 deaths per year. In the U.S. where many infections and other causes of neonatal death have been markedly reduced, prematurity is the leading cause of neonatal mortality at 25%. Prematurely born infants are also at greater risk for developing serious health problems such as cerebral palsy, chronic lung disease, gastrointestinal problems, mental retardation, vision or hearing loss and are more susceptible to developing depression as teenagers.
Why premature birth occurs.
There are several known risk factors for prematurity, but nearly half of all premature births have no known cause. When conditions permit, doctors may attempt to stop premature labor, so that the pregnancy can have a chance to continue to full term. This will increase the baby's chances of health and survival. However, there is currently no reliable means to stop or prevent preterm labor in all cases. In fact, the rate of preterm births in the United States has increased 30% in the past two decades.
Special care for babies born early.
In developed countries, hospitals usually have special facilities for prematurely-born infants. These are usually called "Neonatal Intensive Care Unit" (NICU). In the NICU, premature babies are kept under radiant warmers or in incubators (also called isolettes), which are bassinets enclosed in plastic with climate control equipment designed to keep them warm and limit their exposure to germs. Modern neonatal intensive care involves sophisticated measurement of temperature, respiration, heart function, oxygen supply, and brain activity. Treatments may include fluids and nutrition through intravenous catheters, oxygen supplementation, breathing support, and medications. In developing countries where advanced equipment and even electricity may not be available or reliable, simple measures such as "kangaroo care" (skin to skin warming), encouraging breastfeeding, and basic infection control measures can significantly reduce preterm morbidity and mortality.
"Ex-premies" is the term given to preterm infants born before the normal 37 weeks gestation.
Chances of survival.
The earliest time in the pregnancy where the infant has at least a 50% chance of survival is called the limit of viability. As NICU care has improved over the last 40 years, viability has been reduced to approximately 24 weeks. Rare survivors have been documented as early as 21 weeks, but this date is controversial because in this case, the pregnancy was measured from the date of conception rather than the date of her mother's last menstrual period. This makes gestation appear 2 weeks less than if calculated by the more common method. As risk of brain damage and developmental delay is significant at that threshold even if the infant survives, there are ethical controversies over the aggressiveness of the care given to such infants. The limit of viability has also become a factor in the abortion debate.
