Pulsars are neutron stars that turn quickly and produce electromagnetic radiation that can be received in the form of radio waves. The strength of radiation changes according to a regular period of time, which is thought to match to the period of time in which the star turns. Pulsars also show a so-called lighthouse effect, which occurs when the light and other radiation from a pulsar are only seen at certain periods of time and not all of the time. Werner Becker of the Max-Planck-Institut für extraterrestrische Physik recently said,
Discovery.
writes that "when the first regular radio signals from pulsars were discovered, the Cambridge scientists seriously considered that they might have come from an civilization. They debated this possibility and decided that, if this proved to be correct, they could not make an announcement without checking with higher authorities. There was even some discussion about whether it might be in the best interests of mankind to destroy the evidence and forget it!" (Sturrock, 154) That is to say, when pulsars were discovered, the scientists thought they might be signals from another planet, and the news might be dangerous to society.
CP 1919 produces radio wavelengths, but pulsars have later been found to produce radiation in the X-ray and/or wavelengths. Hewish received the 1974 Nobel Prize in Physics for this and similar work about radio astronomy.
Kinds of pulsars.
Although all three kinds of objects are neutron stars, the things that they can be seen to do and the physics that causes this are very different. But there are some things that are similar. For example, s are probably old rotation-powered pulsars that have already lost most of their energy, and can only be seen again after their binary companions expanded and matter from them started falling onto the neutron star. The process of accretion (matter falling onto the neutron star) can in turn give enough energy to the neutron star to change it into a rotation-powered.
Forecasting of glitches.
In June 2006, astronomer and his team at was the first to forecast glitches (a sudden increase in the speed the star turns), with information that they received from the. They used information received from the pulsar.
How the information was used.
The study of pulsars has resulted in many uses in physics and astronomy. Major examples include the proof of as forecasted by general relativity and the first proof of planets around other stars.
