"Pikmin 2" is a real-time strategy video game made by Nintendo for the Nintendo GameCube game console. It is the sequel to "Pikmin". It's about Olimar and his friend Louie going back to the planet from "Pikmin" to find treasure to save his boss' company. Olimar and Louie control a hoard of Pikmin and give them commands, which include collecting objects, fighting enemies, and reaching near places.
Setting.
Captain Olimar, the star of the series, and Louie, his friend, have to go back to the planet Hocotate when the President of their company made them go there to find treasure to get the company out of debt. They met with the Pikmin that Olimar met in the first game, and they join forces to find these treasure, trying to battle through monsters and the environment.
Summary.
The Planet Hocotate has many locations types of locations, including a and resembles Earth, but from the perspective of an insect, because Olimar and Louie are actually smaller than a quarter. The levels have many objects from the real world, like a Duracell battery and an RC Cola pop cap. A level in "Super Smash Bros. Brawl" is based on this planet.
Gameplay.
The gameplay is mostly the same as "Pikmins. Olimar and Louie control the Pikmin, and they can use them to pick up objects, reach other areas, and fight enemies. Pikmin are plucked out of the ground, and they live in a space ship called an onion when they're not being used. There can be up to 100 different Pikmin out of the onion, and there are five kinds of Pikmin - the first three from Pikmin are the Red Pikmin, Yellow Pikmin, and Blue Pikmin. The Red Pikmin are stronger and can't be burnt, the Yellow Pikmin are lighter, can pick up bombs, and can't be electrocuted, and the Blue Pikmin can swim. "Pikmin 2" adds two new Pikmin - Purple Pikmin and White Pikmin. The Purple Pikmin are the strongest and the heaviest, and the White Pikmin are poison and kill enemies if eaten. These Pikmin can be thrown into the air to reach a higher place, and can be guided to get them all in one spot. One new feature "Pikmin 2" adds is the ability to switch between two leaders - Olimar and Louie.
A big new feature is the Underground, where Olimar, Louie, and their Pikmin go into a pit, which has treasures and powerful creatures in it. The player has to get all the way to the bottom before he or she can get out.
Music.
Music from "Pikmin 2", including the song "Tane no Uta", was used in "Super Smash Bros. Brawl".
Reception.
"Pikmin 2" got great reviews, and rates much higher than the original "Pikmin". Many reviewers were glad that Nintendo got rid of the 30-day time limit from "Pikmin", as well as the treasures based on real life objects. Reviewers were split on the Underground areas, some liking the challenge, while others saying it's boring or too hard.
