Pope Pius XII (Latin: "Pius PP. XII"), born Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli (March 2, 1876 – October 9, 1958), was the 260th pope from March 2, 1939 until his death in 1958.
Life.
Pope Pius XII (1876-1958) was elected Pope on his 63th birthday in 1939. He was Pope until his death in 1958. Before being Pope, he worked in the Vatican in high places since 1901. He was papal nuncio and "Cardinal Secretary of State", which is second in command after Pope Pius XI, his predecessor. As a boss, he was demanding but also showed a sense of humor. Once a Vatican employee, who made a big mistake, came to him to apologize. Pius XII looked at the mistake and smiled: "In Germany, they say in this situation, "I shot a big deer." Unfortunately it is not a real deer, otherwise, you could invite the Vatican for dinner tonight."
Pope.
During the war the Pope and the Catholic Church faced two problems: Many Church members were deported or killed by the Communists in the Soviet Union, which was a war ally of the West. The German Nazis went after the Church as well in Germany and occupied lands, especially in Poland. Many German and Polishpriests died in German concentration camps during the war. The Vatican favored America but did not want to appear partial during the world conflict, working instead unsuccessfully to an ending of it. After his death, the policies of the Catholic Church during World War II and of Pius XII became a subject of continued historical controversy, as questions were raised, if they could have done more to prevent that six million Jews were murdered by the Germans.
After the war,(1939-1945), which cost an estimated fifty-five million lives, and created much devastation and over thirty millio refugees and displaced people in many countries, Pius XII helped to rebuild war torn Europe, and advocated peace and understanding between all the people in Europe and the world. In America and other Western countries, the Catholic Church did well during these years. But under Joseph Stalin the problems in the East increased with more killings, jailings and mass deportations of Catholic people and clergy. This happened especially Eastern Europe and China in the years 1945-1956). Pius XII protested often but without any results.
Pius XII reformed the Church and made it more modern in several areas. Before him, there were almot sixty days of fasting, today, largely thanks to him, only a few. He made the holy Mass more modern and shorter. In 1950 he declared that Mary, the Mother of God, was taken up into heaven after her life was completed.
Teacher.
Pius XII taught and wrote a lot. He wrote forty-one official papal letters (encylicals), that is many more then all his successors in the past fifty years taken together (35). He issued over 1,000 addresses and radio broadcasts, another record. When he was elected Pope, the Italians had (for centuries) an absolute majority, thus nobody could be elected Pope without them or against them. Pius XII changed that after the war, naming forty-two new cardinals, many of them from countries around the world, who never had a cardinal, such as India, China and Chile.
Future saint.
His personal life was by many considered a holy and saintly one. He lived very simply and needed virtually nothing for himself. Once his housekeeper told him that he looked like a "Gypsy", because of his old worn out shoes and quietly replaced them with new ones. Next day, the Pope went to the kitchen and asked for "my Gypsy shoes". He got them back and wore them for a long time. Pope Paul VI opened a process in the Vatican, to make Pius XII a saint. His ongoing canonisation process progressed to the venerable stage on September 2, 2000, under Pope John Paul II. Pope John XXIII, the successor, who like Pius had a nice sense of humor, said: Pius XII was "a saint, and he will be made a saint, but it will take a long time, because he wrote too much". Saints are investigated by the Vatican for every sentence they wrote, and this takes time in the slow moving Vatican. The Pope once was asked, how many people work in the Vatican, answered "Half of them."
