A pronoun is traditionally called a part of speech in grammar (but many modern linguists, experts in linguistics, call it a special type of noun) In English, pronouns are words such as "me, she, his, them, herself, each other, it, what".
Pronouns are often used to take the place of a noun, when that noun is understood (has already been named), to avoid repeating it. For example, instead of saying
When a pronoun replaces a noun, the noun is called the antecedent. But, there are times when the pronoun has no antecedent. This is because generally, the antecedent (what comes before) refers grammatically to the use of the relative pronoun in particular. For example, in the sentence: "The dog that was walking down the street", the relative pronoun is the word that referring back to the antecedent, the word 'dog'. In the sentence "The spy who loved me", the relative pronoun is the word 'who' and its antecedent is the word 'spy'.
Differences and similarities to nouns.
Pronouns are different from common nouns because they normally can't come after "article"s or other "determiner"s. (For example, people don't say "the it".) Pronouns also rarely come after adjectives. They are also different because many of them change depending on how they are used. For example, "we" is a 'subject' in grammar, but the word changes to "us" when used as an object.
Pronouns are the same as nouns because they both change for number (singular & plural), case (subject, object, possessive, etc.), and gender (male, female, animate, inanimate, etc.) Nouns and pronouns can be used in almost all the same places in sentences, and they name the same kinds of things: people, objects, etc. Even though they can't normally come after determiners, or adjectives, neither can proper nouns.
Kinds of pronouns.
There are four kinds of pronouns: personal, reciprocal, interrogative, and relative.
Personal pronouns in English.
This table shows all the personal pronouns in English that are commonly used today.
A Subject Pronoun can replace a noun that is the subject of a sentence. Refer to the table above; the subject pronouns are: I, You, He, She, It, We, They.
Another type of personal pronoun is called the 'reflexive pronoun'. Reflexive pronouns are the words ending in '-self' or '-selves', such as: "myself, itself, themselves".
