Public transport is a way for the public (all the people) to travel around. It is a way for people to travel quickly and cheaply not in their cars. Public transport lets many people travel at the same time.
History.
Public Transport started a long time ago around 1826 in Nantes, France and has become the easiest way to travel.
The first forms of public transport were ferries (big public boats), and animals, such as horses. Horses also pulled carts. People would sit in the carts and then the horses would pull them where they wanted to go.
Types of Public Transport.
The main types of Public Transport are buses, trolleybuses, trams and trains. Trams have been around for a very long time and they used to be pulled by horses. They were first used in the late 1860's. Now trams are electric and run on a line of cable. Buses are like big cars and they drive on the road. Trolleybuses like buses, but they use electricity and are with 2 poles. Trains run on a track and are very fast. Many places in the world use trams and trains as the best way for going places.
Who uses Public Transport?
Many people use public transport. Many people who don’t have cars use buses, trolleybuses, trams to go places near their house, and they use trains to go places far away. Public transport is good because it is easy to use so anybody can go on it.
How to use it.
When using public transport people need a ticket or card to be able to get on. On trams they get a ticket that they put in a machine and it tells them when their ticket runs out. On buses and trolleybuses they buy their ticket from the driver and put it into a machine, and on trains they use a ticket to get into the train station to catch their train. A timetable tells them when they come.
Good things.
Public transport is also very good for the environment. When people use public transport it means that there are fewer cars on the road. With fewer cars on the road there is less pollution created in the world.
Another good thing about public transport is the cost. It is very cheap to catch public transport every day and lots of people like public transport better than their cars.
Sloped or vertical.
Some of these types are often not for use by the general public, e.g. elevators in offices and apartment buildings, buses for personnel or school children, etc.
Nodes and stops.
In addition one can alight from and usually board a taxi at any road where stopping is allowed. Some fixed-route buses allow getting on and off at suitable unmarked locations along that route, typically called a hail-and-ride section.
Free systems.
Free or Zero-fare public transport services are funded in full by means other than collecting a fare from passengers.
Zero-fare services may be funded by national, regional or local government through taxation or by commercial sponsorship by businesses.They usually use relatively small vehicles such as buses and trams.
Several mid-size European cities and many smaller towns around the world have converted their entire bus networks to zero-fare.
Local zero-fare shuttles or inner-city loops are far more common than city-wide systems.
Tourist attraction.
Some means of rail-based public transport are also tourist attractions and/or well known landmarks in their own right. These include San Francisco's famous cable cars, the Molli steam powered train in Bad Doberan, the kusttram along the whole Flemish coast, the Schwebebahn Wuppertal, the Seattle Monorail, and the Christchurch Tram
