Photovoltaics, or PV for short, is a solar power technology that uses solar cells to convert energy from the sun into electricity. Photovoltaics is also the field of study relating to this technology.
Total peak power of installed solar photovoltaic arrays worldwide was around 5,300 MW at the end of 2005 and grid-tied systems represented the largest growth area.
Unlike fossil fuel based technologies, solar photovoltaic power does not lead to any harmful emissions during operation, but the production of the modules leads to some pollution.
Current development.
Solar cells produce direct current electricity from the sun’s rays, which can be used to power equipment or to recharge a battery. Many pocket calculators incorporate a solar cell.
When more power is required than a single cell can deliver, cells are generally grouped together to form “PV modules”, or solar panels, that may in turn be arranged in arrays. Such solar arrays have been used to power orbiting satellites and other spacecraft and in remote areas as a source of power for applications such as roadside emergency telephones, remote sensing, and cathodic protection of pipelines. The continual decline of manufacturing costs leads to cost-effective uses including roadsigns, home power generation and even grid-connected electricity generation.
Worldwide installed photovoltaic totals.
Total peak power of installed solar panels is around 5,300 MW as of the end of 2005. (IEA statistics appear to be under-reported: they report 2,600 MW as of 2004, which with 1,700 installed in 2005 would be a cumulative total of 4,300 for 2005). The three leading countries (Japan, Germany and the USA) represent 90% of the total worldwide PV installations.
PV power stations.
Deployment of solar power depends largely upon local conditions and requirements. But as all industrialised nations share a need for electricity, it is clear that solar power will increasingly be used to supply a cheap, reliable electricity supply. In 2004 the worldwide production of solar cells increased by 60% but silicon shortages reduced growth afterwards.
The list below shows the largest photovoltaic plants in the world. For comparison, the largest non-photovoltaic solar plant, the solar trough-based SEGS in California produces 350 MW and the largest nuclear reactors generate more than 1,000 MW. A Solar power station in Victoria, Australia, which will not come into service until 2010, is expected to be 154 MW when it is completed in 2013.
Some universities and institutes which have a photovoltaics research department.
