Only a certain group of people edit Wikipedia. For this reason, the opinions of that group, and their interests may be covered more in Wikipedia. This is usually called a "system bias", and is a bad thing to have. There are also certain forms of group dynamics that are present. This means that the group of editors as a whole is more occupied to please itself than to edit articles).
Criticism of the content.
Robert McHenry said that Wikipedia should not call itself an encyclopedia. He thinks that this word also means that there is a degree of authority and accountability and that an resource anyone can change cannot have this. McHenry argues that
A number of academics – such as Sarah Deutch, dean of social sciences and professor of history at Duke University, and Margaret Humphries, professor of history and associate clinical professor of medicine at Duke – have criticized Wikipedia for its perceived failure as a reliable source. A related if somewhat "ad hominem" criticism is that many Wikipedia editors do not have degrees or other credentials generally recognized in academia. The use of Wikipedia is not accepted in many schools and universities in writing a formal paper. Several educational institutions have blocked Wikipedia in the past while others have limited its use to only a pointer to external sources. University of Maryland professor of physics Robert L. Park has characterized Wikipedia as a target for "purveyors of pseudoscience."
Some academic journals do refer to Wikipedia articles, but they do not do this the same way as traditional references. For example, Wikipedia articles have been referenced in "enhanced perspectives" provided on-line in the journal "Science". The first of these perspectives to provide a hyperlink to Wikipedia was "A White Collar Protein Senses Blue Light," Dozens of enhanced perspectives have provided such links since then. The publisher of "Science" says that these enhanced perspectives "include hypernotes - which link directly to websites of other relevant information available online - beyond the standard bibliographic references."
Some librarians, academics, and editors of other encyclopedias consider it to have little utility as a reference work. Most university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work, preferring primary sources. One university program and several schools have even banned Wikipedia citations specifically.
Wikipedia's policies state that assertions should be supported by reliable, published sources—ideally, by peer reviewed publications. Jimmy Wales, the "de facto" leader of Wikipedia, stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate as primary sources, and should not be relied upon as authoritative.
