Pedalling in music means the art of using the pedals on musical instruments.
There are several musical instruments which have pedals for various reasons.
Piano.
The piano has at least two pedals, large concert grand pianos always have three. The pedal on the right (operated by the player's right foot) makes the sound sustain (carry on). This is because it makes the dampers come off the strings. When the player plays some notes the strings that are hit by the hammers carry on vibrating until the player takes his or her foot off the pedal. Some of the other strings even start to vibrate as well ("in sympathy").
The pedal on the left makes the sound quieter. It is called the "una corda" pedal (literally: "one string"). This is because, in the early days of the piano, the una corda pedal made all the hammers move up so that a hammer would only hit one string for each note instead of three (most notes on a piano each have three strings to make a bigger sound). On modern pianos the hammers actually hit two strings instead of three. They also tend to hit the string at a point where the hammer is softer, away from the little grooves that get worn in the hammer-head. On an upright piano the hammers move closer to the strings so that they do not hit them so hard.
On pianos which have a middle pedal (called a sostenuto pedal) any note or chord that the player is holding down will be sustained, but any more notes he plays afterwards will not be affected. This can be nice in some modern music where a chord can be held while other notes can be played very short (staccato).
Organ.
On pipe organs there is a pedalboard with pedals which play notes in the same way that the fingers are playing notes. An organ pedalboard usually has two and a half octaves of notes. These are low notes written in the bass clef. An organist has to learn to play with the feet at the same time as with the hands. He uses the toes or the heels of his shoes. It is even possible to play four notes at once (four part chords) but this is very difficult and usually found in some modern French music.
Harp.
There are seven pedals on a concert harp. Each pedal can be in a high, middle or low position. The strings of the harp can be thought of like the white notes of a piano, tuned to naturals (C,D,E etc). Each pedal will change one of the letter-named notes, e.g. the pedal on the left changes all the Ds to D flat (if the pedal is in the highest position) or D sharp (in the lowest position). From left to right the pedals operate the Ds, Cs, Bs, Es, Fs, Gs and As.
Timpani.
Pedal timpani are timpani with a pedal which will tighten or loosen the drumhead. This will make the note go up or down in pitch. It is a fairly new invention. Composers in the Classical music period never had pedal timpani. Their timpani always had to be tuned by hand using the taps around the side. Composers like Béla Bartók wrote for pedal timpani.
Harpsichord.
Modern harpsichords often have pedals which change the sound in the same way that stops on an organ change the sound. In earlier harpsichords the sound was more often changed by pushing in or pulling out hand stops.
See also: pedal point
