is a media franchise that Nintendo owns. The series is based on the concept of catching, collecting, raising, trading, and battling with hundreds of different creatures. This concept was thought of by Satoshi Tajiri, "Pokémons creator. It is represented in many mediums, most notably video games, a still-running anime series, manga, and a trading card game. Although there are 493 different species of Pokémon, the most famous is Pikachu. Other popular ones are Charmander, Bulbasaur, Jigglypuff, and Mewtwo.
Video games.
A number of "Pokémon" video games have been released, all on Nintendo game systems because of The Pokémon Company's loyalty to Nintendo.
Gameplay.
Most of the "Pokémon" video games are based on catching, training, battling, collecting, and trading Pokémon, and the player is a Pokémon trainer who does all these things. There are a number of aspects to the games.
Pokémon themselves.
In the "Pokémon" video games, like the anime, Pokémon are creatures that trainers catch (using Poké Balls), train, battle, collect, and trade with each other. There are 493 of them, and whether or not more will be made is unknown.
Statistics.
Pokémon have six statistics (HP, Attack, Defense, Special Attack, Special Defense, and Speed) which all affect how they perform in battles. Statistics can be raised by using items and by training the Pokémon.
Before "Pokémon Gold and Silver" were released, the "Special Attack" and "Special Defense" were combined into one statistic, "Special." This later became too complicated so it was divided into "Special Attack" and "Special Defense."
Pokémon types.
Each Pokémon has either one or two types. Which types it has affect how it performs when it battles other Pokémon of other types. For example, a Fire-type Pokémon will probably lose to a Water-type, but it will probably beat a Grass-type. It could be compared to a game of rock-paper-scissors.
Abilities.
Starting in "Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire", Pokémon have abilities which affect them in various ways.
Legendary Pokémon.
Legendary Pokémon are Pokémon that are especially rare, and there is only one in the game. Examples of legendaries are Articuno, Mewtwo, Mew, Lugia, Groudon, and Dialga. They are hard to catch, but they are stronger than most Pokémon. Players often desire legendaries over regular Pokémon.
Shiny Pokémon.
Shiny Pokémon are Pokémon that are a different color than that Pokémon is normally. An example would be a yellow Bulbasaur (they are usually green.) They are extremely rare; there is only a 1-in-8,192 chance of a random Pokémon being shiny.
Items.
A large number of different items exist. They are used to help the player or their Pokémon.
Poké Balls.
A Poké Ball is a red-and-white sphere that is used to catch Pokémon. Several different forms of it exist, like the Great Ball, the Ultra Ball, and the Master Ball (which can catch any Pokémon.) Each of these are different colours.
Pokémon Gyms.
Pokémon Gyms are buildings where the player faces a Gym Leader, who always uses one of the 17 types of Pokémon. There are also trainers in the gym that the player can battle, and they also use that type.
History of the games.
The first games, released in 1998, were "Pokémon Red and Blue", which unexpectedly became big hits and are still among the best-selling video games of all time. They followed the adventures of the player, a Pokémon trainer who catches, raises, and battles with Pokémon, collects badges from the 8 Gym Leaders, explores all over Kanto (the region), and trades Pokémon with other people who have the game by using the Game Boy's Game Link Cable. Later, a sequel to "Red" and "Blue" was released: "Pokémon Yellow". In this game, the player's character design is similar to Ash Ketchum (from the anime.) Also, instead of the Pokémon given to the player at the start of "Red" and "Blue" (the player can choose Bulbasaur, Charmander, or Squirtle) in "Yellow" the only possible choice is Pikachu, which represents the Pokémon Ash started with in the anime.
When Nintendo realized how popular "Red", "Blue", and "Yellow" had become, they decided to support the production and release of more games. After "Yellow" came "Pokémon Gold and Silver", released in 2000, which had a total of 251 catchable Pokémon, as opposed to only 151 previously. A sequel to the two games was released, "Pokémon Crystal", which had several new features that weren't on "Gold" and "Silver": Pokémon had animated sprites when they came into battle, there was a subplot within the games relating to the different letter shapes of the Pokémon Unown, and there was a new building called the Battle Tower, where players could battle very strong Pokémon to win items and set records. In "Gold" and "Silver", if the player goes to the site of the Battle Tower in "Crystal", the area is filled up by trees. In "Gold", "Silver", and "Crystal", once the player has beaten the Elite Four, they can go to Kanto, the region in "Red", "Blue", and "Yellow".
In 2003, "Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire" were released. They were the first "Pokémon" games on the Game Boy Advance, and this upset many players because they could not trade Pokémon with "Red", "Blue", "Yellow", "Gold", "Silver", or "Crystal". However, there were 135 new Pokémon, bringing the total to 386. There were many new features, like a PokéNav (a new item used for many ingame tasks), many more kinds of Poké Balls, a far bigger region (Hoenn) than in previous games (Kanto and Johto), and a Battle Tower different from the one in "Crystal". Players could also create Secret Bases, small hideouts hidden in trees and rock walls.
In 2004, "Pokémon Colosseum" was released. It was the first "Pokémon" game on the Nintendo GameCube that got any mainstream recognition. It took place in a new region called Orre, and featured a totally different storyline than the "Pokémon" games before it. The player is a member of Team Snagem, an evil corporation who makes Shadow Pokémon (Pokémon whose hearts have been "sealed"). The player leaves Team Snagem and spends the rest of the game defeating them, with the help of a red-haired girl who can detect Shadow Pokémon. (In 2005, a sequel was released: '.)
Later in 2004, "Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen" were released. They did not take place in a new region, and they did not have any new Pokémon. They were simply remakes of "Pokémon Red and Blue", except for a new "extra region" called the Sevii Islands, and a few new features. However, they made it possible for players of "Ruby" and "Sapphire" to get earlier Pokémon in their games. If a person had "Ruby", "Sapphire", "Colosseum", "FireRed", and "LeafGreen" (which many fans of the games did), they could have all 386 Pokémon, which made many players happy.
In 2005, "Pokémon Emerald" was released. It was a sequel to "Ruby" and "Sapphire". It was the first "main" "Pokémon" game since "Crystal" where Pokémon had battle animations instead of static images. There was also a new place called the Battle Frontier where players could go after they beat the Elite Four. It was similar to the Battle Tower in "Crystal", "Ruby", and "Sapphire", except it was eight different facilities, all with different rules. Players earned Battle Points which could be used to buy items for Secret Bases, items for Pokémon, and other things.
In 2007, "Pokémon Diamond and Pearl" were released. They took place in a new region called Sinnoh. They had 107 new Pokémon, which brought the total to 493. Another noticeable difference from the previous games was that "Diamond" and "Pearl" did not capitalize all the letters in names of Pokémon, people, towns, items, and other things that were important to the games. For example, Lugia would appear as "LUGIA" in previous games, but in "Diamond" and "Pearl" it would just say "Lugia." This cleared up a lot of players' confusion, because many thought that a sentence like "LUGIA is found in the WHIRL ISLANDS" looked unusual. A sequel to "Diamond" and "Pearl", "Pokémon Platinum", has been released in Japan, but not the United States yet. It will be released in the United States in early 2009.
Anime.
Not long after "Pokémon Red and Blue" (the first "Pokémon" video games) were released, a "Pokémon" anime was created. It was first broadcast in Japan in late 1995, and in the United States in late 1998. The anime started what has been called "Pokémania", which meant that after the anime came out, it became very popular among children, and many parents assumed it was a fad and no one would care about it in a couple years. However, it was never cancelled, and it is still running, although it is not as popular as in 1998 and 1999.
The anime shows the adventures of Ash Ketchum, a 10-year-old Pokémon trainer who has many adventures, meeting many new people and Pokémon. His most famous Pokémon, and probably "the" most famous Pokémon, is Pikachu.
A number of "Pokémon" films have also been made that relate to the anime. The first one was "Pokémon: The First Movie" (released in 1999) and they are still being made.
Trading card game.
A "Pokémon" trading card game also exists. Players use Pokémon cards to battle each other. There are also live tournaments hosted by Nintendo. The "Pokémon" trading card game is noticeably less complicated than such trading card games as Yu-Gi-Oh! and. Only 60 cards are used in a player's deck, and 6 of these are set aside in a pile called "prize cards." There is also a discard pile. Pokémon's damage is counted by "damage counters" which are placed on the cards.
There are cards designed as various Pokémon, which need "Energy" cards to use attacks. There are also "Trainer" cards, which are used for additional things other than direct Pokémon attacks. Most fans of the series agree that a good deck is made of about 20 "Pokémon" cards, 20 "Energy" cards, and 20 "Trainer" cards.
There is also a special kind of Pokémon in the trading card game called "ex" Pokémon. "ex" Pokémon are stronger than regular ones, but when they are knocked out, the player's opponent draws 2 of their prize cards (with regular Pokémon it is just one.) In the "Diamond and Pearl" trading card game expansion, "ex" was changed to the Pokémon having levels of "lv. X."
Criticism.
The "Pokémon" media franchise, especially the anime, has been often criticized by organizations.
Dennō Senshi Porygon.
An episode of the anime called "Dennō Senshi Porygon" ("Electric Soldier Porygon" in the United States) was first shown in Japan on December 16, 1997. One part of the episode showed quickly flashing red and blue lights. This caused 685 Japanese children to have epileptic seizures. Because of this, the anime went on a 4-month break, and several laws were put in place regarding the flashing lights.
Porygon, one of the main characters in the episode, has not appeared again in the anime ever since "Dennō Senshi Porygon". It has two evolved forms, Porygon2 and Porygon-Z, and neither of them have appeared in the anime at all.
An episode of "The Simpsons" called "Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo" made fun of "Dennō Senshi Porygon". So did an episode of "South Park" called "Chinpokomon".
Jynx.
Jynx, a species of Pokémon, was criticized because it looked like it was using blackface (an old film-making technique that makes white actors look African-American.) This was not an issue in Japan, but it caused a lot of controversy in the United States because of the United States' history of racism.
Ever since then, Jynx has purple skin instead of black skin, and it has only appeared rarely in the anime.
