A pie is a type of food. Pies are usually baked, and often made in the shape of a circle or an oval. On the outside of a pie there is a sweet or savory crust, and on the inside there is a filling. Pies can be filled with sweet fruit filling, meat, or vegetables. Pie is great for desserts because of its delicious sweetness.
Ingredients.
A pie is baked with a shell or crust, which is usually made of pastry dough that covers or completely contains a filling of fruit, meat, fish, vegetables, cheeses, creams, chocolate, custards, nuts, or other sweet or savoury ingredients.
Sweet Pies.
Some of these pies are pies in name only, such as the Boston cream pie, which is a cake. Many fruit and berry pies are very similar, varying only the fruit used in filling.
Variations of pie.
There are many different kinds of pie. People from different countries often have their own different type of pie.
Great Britain, Australia and New Zealand.
Meat pies with fillings such as steak and cheese, steak and kidney, minced beef or chicken and mushroom are popular in the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand as take-away snacks. They are also served with chips as an alternative to fish and chips at British chip shops. The residents of Wigan near Greater Manchester are so renowned for their preference for this food-stuff that they are often referred to as "Pie Eaters" (though the historical reasons for this title are disputed). In honour of this, the main ingredient of a 'Wigan kebab' is the pie, which is placed in a barm cake to make up this popular local delicacy. The combination of pie and mash is traditionally associated with London. Shepherd's pie (which does not involve pastry) is also a favourite amongst people throughout Britain.
In contrast to other meat pies which are served hot, "Pork Pies" generally have a very high fat content and are always served cold. These meat pies contain beef and gravy in a shortcrust piecase, often with a flaky top. Many bakeries and specialty shops sell gourmet pies for the more discriminating customer. A peculiarity of Adelaide (a city in Australia) food is the "Pie floater", where a meat pie is floated in a plate of thick green pea soup.
North America.
Pot pies with a flaky crust and bottom are also a popular American dish, typically with a filling of meat (particularly beef, chicken or turkey), gravy, and mixed vegetables (potatoes, carrots and peas). Frozen pot pies are often sold in individual serving size.
Fruit pies may be served with a scoop of ice cream, a style known in North America as "à la mode". Apple pie is a traditional choice, though any pie with sweet fillings may be served "à la mode". This combination, and possibly the name as well, is thought to have been popularized in the mid-1890s in the United States.
A tourtière is a meat pie originating from Quebec in Canada, usually made with ground pork, veal, or beef.
Pie throwing.
Cream filled or topped pies are favourite props for humour, particularly when aimed at people who are too serious. Throwing a pie in a person's face has been a staple of film comedy since the early days of the movies, and is often associated with clowns in popular culture. Pranksters have taken to targeting politicians and celebrities with their pies, an act called pieing. Activists sometimes engage in the pieing of political and social targets as well. One such group is the Biotic Baking Brigade. "Pieing" can result in injury to people and pie throwers can face assault or more serious charges.
