Pokémon is a Japanese video game franchise created by Satoshi Tajiri for Nintendo in the 1990s. It is known as "Pocket Monsters" in Japan. It is now made up of animated television programs (anime), Japanese comic books (manga), trading cards, and toys but, most importantly, the video games. There are currently 493 monsters. Pikachu is the most well-known. When the idea was invented, there were only 150, which was upgraded to 151 (including Mew) when the Blue version in Japan was released. In the United States and Europe, the number of Pokémon was 151 from the beginning. There are now over 400 altogether.
The Pokémon games involve making decisions about what to do and when to do it. They allow the player to catch the monsters, train them to make them better and attack other monsters so that they get better abilities and possibly evolve into different Pokémon. It is also possible to trade Pokémon with a friend. The Pokémon in the battles never bleed or die; they only faint. All Pokémon love human beings, except for Shadow Pokémon - the doors to their hearts have been artificially closed. The game's slogan in the U.S. was "Gotta catch 'em all!", although now it is not used officially any more. The Japanese slogan is "Let's get Pokémon" Over one hundred million (100,000,000) of the games have been sold so far, not counting the ones released for the Nintendo 64 and the Nintendo GameCube. This makes it the second best-selling video game series of all time (after Nintendo's Mario series).
Seven versions of the animated television series exist, from 1998 until now onKids WB and Cartoon Network. Additionally, nine full-length movies have been made since 1999.
Games.
Pokémon Red and Blue are the first two games games in the series. They were released in Japan in 1996, then in North America in 1998 and finally in Europe in 1999. They are for the Game Boy. They take place in a region called Kanto. The player can choose either Bulbasaur, Charmander or Squirtle as his/her starter Pokémon. Both games are separate, but have the same plot. They are two of the best selling video games of all time. Blue Version was released slightly after the first two in Japan and features changes such as new graphics and different Pokémon to catch and was released outside of Japan instead of Green.
The third game in the series. It is an upgraded version of Pokémon Red and Blue made to be more like the TV show. It features graphics and characters from the show, such as Team Rocket's Jesse and James (Musashi and Kojiro in Japan). It was first released in Japan in 1998, then in North America in 1999 and finally in Europe in 2000. Again, it is for the Game Boy. The player can only choose Pikachu as his/her starter Pokémon. When the player walks, Pikachu follows the player around.
Pokémon Gold and Silver are the fifth and sixth games in the series. They are now for the Game Boy Color. They were released in Japan in 1999, then in North America in 2000 and in Europe in 2001. They started the second generation of the Pokémon video game series. It has a new region called "Johto", has 100 new Pokémon and many more additions. The player can choose between Chikorita, Cyndaquil and Totodile as their starter Pokémon.
Pokémon Crystal is the seventh game in the series. It is an upgraded version of Pokémon Gold and Silver. It was released in Japan in 2000, then in North America and Europe in 2001. It is the first Pokémon game that allows the player to choose the gender for his/her character. There is also the Battle Tower, which is to the west of Olivine City. It allows the player to battle other trainers. Also, all Pokémon had animated battle sprites once a battle began. For example, when Cyndaquil entered battle, the flames on its back flickered.
The eighth games in the series. They are for the Game Boy Advance. They were released in Japan in 2002, then in North America and Europe in 2003.
new games of red,blue and yellow for the Game Boy Advance. They play like Ruby and Sapphire, but they take place back in Kanto with the original 151 Pokémon. It has better graphics then the old version. However, the music is the same.
like Ruby and Sapphire but has a slightly different plot. You will catch Kyogre and Groudon. A new area called Battle Frontier has been added, and is only able to be reached after beating the Elite Four.
The latest games in the series. They are the first on Nintendo DS. They are like the previous games with new Nintendo DS features such as the touch screen and multiplayer using Wi-Fi. They take place in a new region called "Sinnoh" with even more new Pokémon to catch. Players can also insert Ruby, Sapphire, Emerald, FireRed, or LeafGreen into the other cartridge slot and bring their old teams over to the new game by using the Pal Park.
Spin-off Games.
These are games not part of the main series.
Pokémon Pinball was a pinball game for the Game Boy Color and Nintendo 64. It featured a special rumble cartridge that shook the Game Boy when played, for example when the pinball hit a bumper. It had a sequel for Game Boy Advance called Pokémon Pinball Ruby & Sapphire.
One of the first Pokémon games for the Nintendo 64. The player drove around in a special vehicle and took pictures of Pokémon instead of catching them.
Another Nintendo 64 game. Its main feature was a microphone that let the player talk to and play games with Pikachu.
The first game that let the player battle Pokémon with 3D graphics on your Nintendo 64. The game allowed players to plug in a Game Boy cartridge and bring their team in to battle.
