Psychology is the science of human behavior, thought, and feeling. It deals with all actions and reactions of people. Because behavior is difficult to study as a whole, psychologists often only look at small parts of it at a time. Psychology overlaps with many other sciences including Medicine, Biology, Computer Science and Linguistics.
Methods.
Psychology is a type of science, and psychologists use the same types of methods that researchers from other natural and social sciences use.
Psychologists will make theories to try and explain a behavior or pattern they see. Based on their theory they will make some predictions. They may then carry out an experiment or collect information that will tell them whether their prediction was right or wrong.
A good psychologist will also try to do experiments to show that his or her theory may be wrong. Just like in any other science, a group of psychologists can never be completely sure that their theory is the right one; but if they keep trying to show that it's wrong and they never do, they can be confident that their theory works. The technical term for showing a theory is wrong is falsifiability.
Psychologists use a lot of different tools as part of their daily work and to carry out their experiments. Psychologists use surveys to ask people how feel and what they think. They may use special medical devices to look at the brain and to see what it's doing. Psychologists also use statistics to help them analyze the data that they get from their experiments.
Some types of experiments can not be done on people because the process would be too lengthy, dangerous or unfair unethical. To get a better understanding of how people act and react, sometimes psychologists study animals because the process may be simpler and easier to understand.
Psychologists.
Psychologists are people who practice or work in the field of Psychology. A psychologist may work in either basic research or applied research, or if he or she is a clinical psychologist or counseling psychologist may be a therapist. Basic research is the scientific study of the psychology of people or animals in order to learn more about them. Applied research is using knowledge from basic research to solve real-world problems.
To become a psychologist, a person must first get a basic degree at a university and then go to graduate school. A Master's degree, either M.S. (Master of Science) or M.A. (Master of Arts) allows beginning work. A Doctorate degree takes a longer time because it includes studying more material and writing a research paper called a dissertation. The doctoral graduate uses the initials Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) after his or her name. Some clinical psychologists earn a Doctor of Psychology degree and use the initials Psy.D. after their name. The American Psychological Association says that a person needs a Ph.D. or Psy.D. to call himself or herself a psychologist.
The words "psychologist" and "psychiatrist" may be confused with each other. A "psychiatrist" has graduated from medical school and uses the initials M.D. Usually a psychologist can not prescribe drugs for a patient; only a psychiatrist or other MD can.
