Pet Sounds is the tenth music album by the American band The Beach Boys (not counting their Christmas album), which was released in 1966. It was very popular because of its originality; most of The Beach Boys' albums before it had all been about surfing, summer, cars, girls, and fun, and were quite basic musically (mostly rock-n-roll and surf). Pet Sounds was different because of its more complex arrangements; their bass player Brian Wilson, who wrote all of their songs, used a system of recording songs different from the system he had used recording earlier songs. He would record different instrumental pieces for the song separately, then put them together to make the song "whole", meaning that he was able to create sounds that he couldn't create with just the band playing the song. In the recording stringed and wind instruments were used, as well as such unusual for rock music instruments as vibraphone, harp, French horn, harpsichord, electro-theremin and things as bicycle ring, whistles, Coca Cola cans with stones inside of it. Moreover, the lyrics of the songs were more serious and described problems, disappointments and sadness of a young man. Because all the songs are united by similar mood and themes, it is considered to be a concept album.
However, much of the album Brian recorded by himself, with a symphony orchestra and professional studio musicians--people who are hired to play songs for an album--which some of the other Beach Boys didn't like, because they felt like he was ignoring their talents. Mike Love, one of the band's members, thought that it would be too difficult to play these songs on scene, and that their fans would not understand them.
After its release Pet Sounds was not sold very well and reached 10th place in American hit-parade - which was seen as a failure by its main author, but music critics everywhere loved it. The album gained real recognition in 1990s-2000s, when many music magazines listed it in their lists of the best albums in popular music (New Musical Express, Rolling Stone, Melody Maker, Mojo Magazine).
Following its success, Brian decided he wanted to make another album in the same way, which he called "SMiLE." (See the article on SMiLE (album) for more information)
