Paramount Pictures Corporation is an American motion picture production and distribution company. It is the oldest movie studio in the United States. It has been in existence for 94 years. Paramount is owned by media conglomerate Viacom. Paramount is one of the Big Ten movie studios
History.
Paramount Pictures Inc. can trace its beginnings to the creation in May, 1912 of the Famous Players Film Company. Organized in 1914 by a Utah theater owner, W. W. Hodkinson, Paramount Pictures was the first successful nation-wide distributor. Until this time, movies were sold on a state-wide or regional basis. This was inefficient and costly to producers.
In 1916, Adolph Zukor created a three-way merger of his Famous Players Film Company, Jesse L. Lasky's Lasky Feature Play Company, and Paramount. The new company was called Famous Players-Lasky and grew quickly. Lasky ran the production side. Hiram Abrams was in charge of distribution and Zukor handled the business side of the company.
In 1927, Famous Players-Lasky took on the name Paramount-Famous Lasky Corportation. Three years later, because of the importance of the Publix theater chain, it was later known as Paramount-Publix Corporation. The company went into bankruptcy in 1933. When the company emerged from bankruptcy, it was known as Paramount Pictures, Inc.
Paramount Pictures had been an early supporter of television. It created stations in 1939 in Los Angeles (later to become KTLA) and Chicago's WBKB.
From the 1980s to the present day.
Paramount's successful run of lightweight pictures in the 1980s and 1990s created hits like "Flashdance", the "Friday the 13th" series; "Raiders of the Lost Ark", "Beverly Hills Cop" and the "Star Trek" features.
In 1993, entertainment conglomerate Viacom made a bought Paramount.
Paramount is the last major film studio located in Hollywood. Other studios such as Warner Brothers and Columbia moved to Burbank, California.
On December 11, 2005, Paramount said it had purchased DreamWorks SKG in a deal worth $1.6 billion. On February 1, 2006, the studio announced that the DreamWorks acquisition was completed.
