Rules of punctuation.
The use of punctuation in English can change from place to place and from time to time.
The use of these marks is often decided by a group or organization and then written down as a style guide. A newspaper may have a style guide to make their stories use the same rules (called consistency).
Some people become angry about what they call "bad" punctuation. The rules are really up to the writer to decide, as long as the meaning is clear. However, if the rules are not followed, a writer's work may seem to be poorly written.
Period or full stop.
A period, known as a full stop in some countries, looks like this:.
A period is used to end a sentence. It shows when an idea is finished.
A period can show numbers that are smaller than one. With money, a period is used to show the amount of money less than one dollar.
A period is used to show that a word has been made shorter. A word that is made shorter with a period is called an abbreviation.
Question mark.
A question mark looks like this: ?
Question marks are used when writing a question, to make an inquiry, or to ask something.
Exclamation mark.
An exclamation mark looks like this: !
An exclamation mark is used write about a strong emotion, or to write the words a person shouted. It can be used to make a statement stronger or more forceful.
An exclamation mark can be used with a question mark, to make a question more forceful.
Apostrophe.
An apostrophe looks like this: '
An apostrophe has two main uses.
Ownership.
An apostrophe can be used to show that something belongs to something else.
If there is only one thing, the letter "s" is used after an apostrophe to show ownership.
Sometimes the letter "s" is not used after an apostrophe to show ownership. A word will end with just an apostrophe if there is more than one thing and the word already ends with an "s".
Contractions.
An apostrophe can be used to put two small words together. Two small words that are put together with an apostrophe to make one word are called contractions. This is normal in writing about a person speaking. Spoken English often uses contractions because these words are easier to say.
Common mistakes when using apostrophes.
Pronouns do not use an apostrophe to show that something belongs to something else. Among these are "its", "his", "hers", "theirs".
Plurals (words referring to more than one thing) do not need an apostrophe.
Quotation marks.
Quotation marks (also called quote marks or quotes for short) are used around the words that people have said, or direct speech. They are used in pairs.
In these cases, quotation marks go after the commas and periods, not before.
Quotation marks are also used in some other cases besides direct speech, for example around the name of a song. In these cases, the commas can come after the quote marks.
Colon.
Colons can be used at the beginning of a list. "This is a list of animals: birds, cats, insects, pigs, and sheep.".
Colons can be used to replace a semicolon in between two parts of a sentence, but this is not common today.
Standard English usage is to have no spaces before, and one space after a colon.
Semicolon.
A semicolon is used to connect two sentences, in one sentence, where a comma could also be used.
Ellipsis.
An ellipsis is a mark that looks like this:...
It is used to show where words have been missed out when writing what a person said. It can also be used to show that there is more to be said but the person stopped at that point.
Bibliography.
"Eats, Shoots, and Leaves" By Lynne Truss. Published By Profile Books, Ltd. in 2003
