The pedagogy is the art or the science of the teaching, or of the education.
Etymology of the word.
"Pedagogy" has come from the Greek, "paidagogos" ("παιδαγωγία"), that was the slave which accompanied the children to the school. The word "paida" or "paidos" applies to boys, this is the reason why certain people distinguish between "Pedagogy" (to teach boys) and andragogy (to teach adults). The Latin word in order to apply to the pedagogy, education, is much more used and, often, both are used in indistinguished form.
History of the pedagogy.
The pedagogy exists since the education had passed to be considered a social matter and not only of family. From it the first theoretical writings appeared in Greece, in the democratic polis (a Greek city-state) where the teaching made easier the access to the politics. Rome had received from Greeks this worry.
In the Middle Ages, the education was much connected with the Church, place where the unusual education which was considered of advantage was the religious which permited to achieve the salvation. Moreover, the culture was in the monasteries and afterwards in the universities, controlled by the specialists in theology. The Renaissance, with its enthusiasm of getting back of the classicals and the wish of thought and of having culture, had given a new impulse to the pedagogy. With the Enlightenment became connected really with the idea of progress, place where without education people cannot move themselves forward (from here the connected series of operations designed to bring about a alphabetization).
The pedagogy at present.
At present, the pedagogy has developped much from its etymological origin. At present, the pedagogy is not the science which busies itself with the techniques of the teaching. Teaching is a task of other pedagogical science called just teaching. The pedagogy is a set of thoughts which busy themselves of the education as a phenomenon social typically and human specifically. It is, thus, a science of psychosocial (relating social conditions to mental health) character which has as goal the study of the education with the end of knowing it and improving it. Also is a science of character serving as or dictating a norm for that reason it is not dedicated to describe the educational phenomenon but to establish the norms which we have to follow in order to carry to good word this phenomenon.
Pedagogy also applies to the correct usage of strategies of teaching (see instructional theory). For example, the Brazilian Paulo Freire, one of more significant specialists in educational theories or methods of the 20th century, applies to his method of teaching for adults as "critical pedagogy".
