Philosophy of science is the part of philosophy that studies sciences. Philosophers who are interested in philosophy of science try to explain how a human knowledge, that means all that we are able to understand, could be a science (by induction and observation, by deduction, or by an other method ?), what kind of explanation is science and what exactly science could teach us about nature and universe.
Popular ideas about science.
The word “science” is used in everyday life language in a lot of domains that don't seem to concern directly philosophy of science. For example, when one says that science proves something, one means that this thing is absolutely true. Advertising uses so the word “science” to give to some object more value, because one believes that if science says that a product has a certain property, then it "must have" this property.
More generally, science is conceived like something as a knowledge about the world that we must believe. And we think usually that such a belief is right because scientifical truths are proved by direct observation of the facts. In this view, a scientist simply describes what he observes by the means of his senses, that is to say, what he can observe in experience.
A “naive” conception of science.
For the common sense, then, science begins with observations: all scientific knowledges come from the facts of experience, and theories are produced by the observation of this facts and could then be tested by prediction.
---> INDUCTION -----> LAWS AND THEORIES -----> DEDUCTION --->
FACTS OF EXPERIENCE PREDICTIONS AND EXPLANATIONS
Although the majority of philosophers don't think that this conception could be true, it shows to us the essential notions of philosophy of science: fact, induction, law, and so on. The aim of the philosophy of science is to understand what we really mean by those notions and how we could define them for justify the scientifical knowledge.
Universal laws.
If such a regularity is observed at all times and all places, it is then expressed in a form called "universal law". A universal law says to us that when something is, at any times and any places, then an another thing must be. For example, if "fire is hot" is an universal law, when there is (or was or will be) fire in a place of the universe, it's absolutely certain that, in all cases, fire "is hot".
In this logical expression, (x) means "all x", that is to say, "in any case where there is a x". x itself is what is called a variable, that is to say, that it can refer to a lot of things, for example, "some material body." Px means that "x is P" or "has the property P", and Qx means that "x is Q" or "has the property Q". The symbol ⊃ links Px to Qx, and corresponds to the English "if... then..." We can then read the expression "(Px ⊃ Qx)" in this way: "if x is P, then x is also Q."
Rudolf Carnap gives the following illustration for understand this logical expression: "For every body x, if that body is heated, that body will expand". This illustration is the law of thermal expansion. Of course, this sentence is a very simplified formulation of this law.
A universal law can then be describe as a law that says that if there is a x, and if x is P (or has the property P), then x is Q (or has the property Q). Such a description is the simplest one, but doesn't describe all kind of scientific laws.
Statistical laws.
The symbol formula_2 is a "exclusive disjunction", and, in this example, it means that "x is Q" is true or "x is R" is true, but when "x is Q" is true, "x is R" is false, and when "x is R" is true, "x is Q" is false. We know that one or the other must be true, but we don't able to determine simply by the means of a universal law which of them is true and which of them is false.
However, even in such a case, a kind of law is sometimes possible. Indeed, by counting boys and girls, we know that about half of the children born each year are girls. Therefore, there is a measure of the fact that each child is a boy or a girl, and this measure is a law that is called a "statistical law".
What teachs us exactly a statistical law ? It teaches us that a fact happens a certain number of times, what is called a "frequency", and it defines the "probability" that the fact happens. Therefore, if x is a child, if we don't know if this child is a boy or a girl, however we know that half a time a child is a boy.
Facts and laws.
When we know an universal or a statistical law, we think that we have some knowlegde about objects of the world. Both kind of laws learn us something about what is called "facts." A fact is a singular thing or a singular event; for example, "this morning, the sun rose" is a fact, and we can express this fact by a sentence. When we know a fact, we have only the knowledge of this fact in this singularity, and therefore such a sentence don't tell us why that is so.
1 is the universal law we want to apply to "a". "a" is a particular object.
2 means that "a" has the property P: for example, we have observe that "a is P".
3 is the deduction that logically follows 1 and 2: if a has the property P (2), then a has the property Q (3). Therefore, if we know 1 (the law that explains some facts) and 2 (a fact that corresponds to Px), we can predict 3 (a new fact) and explain it by 1.
The problem of induction.
Scientific laws allow men to discover and predict new facts. But a more fundamental question, for philosophers and for scientists, is to understand how we can generalize our observations, and if this kind of generalisations that we call laws are really valid.
As we have seen, for the naive conception of science, laws come directly from facts of experience. If we observe a lot of times a fact A in various situations, and if we observe that all A we have seen have the property B, then we could conclude that all A must have the property B. This is the basic formulation of the principle of induction.
