Pakistan, official name Islamic Republic of Pakistan, is a country in South Asia, next to the Republic of India, Iran, Afghanistan, and China. It has a long coastline along the Arabian Sea in the south. Pakistan has the sixth largest population in the world and is the second largest Muslim country after Indonesia. Pakistan has the seventh largest armed forces in the world and is a nuclear power.
The name Pākistān (IPA://) means "Land of the Pure" in Urdu and Persian.
Pakistan has a total land area of 880,940 km², 34th largest in the world (including Pakistani-administered territories of Azad Kashmir and Northern Areas but excluding disputed territories with India).
Political divisions.
Pakistan consists of the following 4 provinces, two territories and two special administrative areas (both in Kashmir). These are furtherly divided into 26 divisions with 107 districts, each with several tehsils and union councils.
Among the four provinces, Punjab has the most people but Balochistan is the largest province by area.
(India refers to Azad Kashmir and the Northern Areas as the "Pakistan Occupied Kashmir"(POK).
History.
Pakistan became independent in 1947 from the British Empire but has a long history including the Indus Valley Civilisation. Until 1971, Pakistan also included an area east of India which is now called Bangladesh. It lost that area after a war with Indian Army and the Bengalis of Bangladesh.
During recent years Pakistan has been in the centre of world politics, firstly because of its support to guerillas in Afghanistan, following Soviet invasion 1979, and later during the1990s because of its cooperation with and support for the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. However, since 2000 Pakistan has basically supported the West in their war against fundamentalist muslim terrorism, including the removal of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan.
Pakistan is a member of the Commonwealth. However, after the war in East Pakistan the country was excluded (between 1972-1989); it was also between 1999 and 2004 and is currently excluded from the Commonwealth (since November 2007).
Geography.
Earthquakes are frequent in this area. The earthquake in 2005 with its epicentrum in Kashmir is the strongest so far. Over 100,000 people were killed or wounded on October 8, 2005.
Politics.
Pakistan is officially a federal republic, but during a long period in its history it shifted between a democratic state and a military dictatorship. Military dictators include Ayub Khan in the 1960s, General Zia-ul-Haq in the 1980s and General Pervez Musharraf between 1999 and 2008.
However, most Heads of State have been elected by the people.
Pakistan's two largest political parties are the Pakistan People's Party and the government party Pakistan Muslim League (Q) (which have military support).
On the 27th December 2007 the leader of the Pakistan People's Party, Benazir Bhutto, was assassinated.
Tourism.
Pakistan has several high mountain peaks. People from all the world come to climb in those mountains. The most famous mountain peak is K2. K2 is the second highest mountain peak in the world.
Demography.
97% of the inhabitants are Muslim. Most of the Muslims in Pakistan are Sunni Muslims (>75%) and Shia Muslims (20%), however a few minority groups exist. Pakistan also have some Christian, Hindu and animist minority groups in the northern parts of the country.
Languages.
Urdu and English are both official languages. Even if most people can speak Urdu, only about 8 percent of the population speak Urdu as their first language. Many people also speak Punjabi, Pushto, Sindhi and Baluchi.
Hinduism in Pakistan.
After the separation from British India, Hinduism had much less importance in the newly created state of Pakistan, but has played an important role in its culture and politics as well as the history of its regions. In fact, Pakistan has the 5th largest population of Hindus, after Sri Lanka.
The term Hindu is etymologically derived from the Sindhu (Indus River) of Pakistan. The Sindhu is one of the holy rivers of Hinduism. Thus, in many ways, the land which is today's heavily Muslim Pakistan has played an important part in the origin of Hinduism. There are approximately 3 million Hindus living in Pakistan.
