The Pinnacle Point Man is a Homo sapiens found in the "Pinnacle-Point cave". This cave is near Mosselbaai/Mossel Bay at the South coast South Africa. The Pinnacle Point Man lived 164.000 years ago. The discovery contradicts the classical hypothesis that the modern behaviour existed only 45.000 years ago. It also contradicts that this behaviour was reached through a „large cultural leap“. The discoveries shouw that this Homo sapiens was able to work with haematite pieces, and could paint his skin to emphasize his social position.
Because the African climate became cool and dry, the food resources were reduced dramatically. This was the reason why the Pinnacle point man moved to the shores. There, they could eat marine creatures like mussels, snails and crabs. These men also used amazing subtly tools. Microliths were mount on wood shafts
The Discovery.
The startling discovery has been made in 2007 by an international team. The team include the palaeoanthropologist Curtis Marean from the "Institute of Human Origins" of the Arizona State University and three graduate students of the "School of Human Evolution and Social Change". They came to the conclusion that humans living there in this primeval times started to eat new food in addition. They added shellfish and other marine resources to their diet. The cause for this evolution was the climate change. It is the first evidence that mankind was able to this. The report in the magazine Nature also reports that the evidence for usage of coloured pigments was also found. The earliest known usage had been 70.000 years from now until then.
The findings give rise to the assumption that living near coastal lines has essentially formed the evolution.
Searching for beginnings.
After debating for decades, paleoanthropologists now agree there is enough genetic and fossil evidence. These evidence show that Homo sapiens evolved in Africa 100,000 to 200,000 years ago. But at that time, the world was in an ice age, and Africa was a desert. But as archaeological sites dating to that time period are rare in Africa, palaeonthologist Curtis Marean analysed differeny information. He analysed geologic formations, the sea currents, climate data and much more. As a result, he was able to pinpoint his research to destinations like the Pinnacle Point cave, where the findings have been made.
See also.
Hominid evolution
