Pink Floyd was an English rock band. They performed for more than 30 years, and have sold more than 300 million (300,000,000) albums. Their name comes from two of Syd Barrett's favorite blues artists, "Pink Anderson" and "Floyd Council".
Syd Barrett started the group. He played guitar and sang during that time, but left soon after because of mental illness that was made worse by heavy drug use. The other people in the band were Roger Waters (bass guitar and vocals), David Gilmour (lead guitar and vocals), Richard Wright (keyboard and vocals), and Nick Mason (drums). David Gilmour went into the band in 1968. From 1985 on, Waters has not been in the band. Some fans say that Pink Floyd without Waters is not Pink Floyd.
Pink Floyd is a famous band. They played a kind of rock music called "progressive rock". It was a style they created after the psychedelic start of the band under Barrett's leadership. Pink Floyd, apart from Gilmour, was started in an architectural college. At the time of "Dark Side Of The Moon", a very famous album that stayed on music charts for a very long time, they were famous as studio musicians who loved to experiment with music. Being rather rich already, the members never changed their style just to sell more records. They could be called "anti-stars".
The album "The Wall" had devoted fans, and was put into a rock opera movie, directed by Alan Parker, in 1982. That album is important to the history of the group, telling of the distance they put between them and their public, as well as being the last album they all worked on before splitting up.
They used a lot of things to make their concerts interesting to watch. They had a round movie screen on the stage. They would show videos on the screen when they played. They also used lighting and lasers in a much fancier way than many bands do. They also have big balloon puppets. The most famous is in the shape of a pig, which first appeared on the cover for their album, "Animals". The pig has become something that reminds people of Pink Floyd. Another picture that reminds people of Pink Floyd is a prism with light shining through it. This was the album cover of "Dark Side of the Moon", one of their most popular albums.
The last album of new songs that Pink Floyd released is called "The Division Bell". It was made in 1994. Pink Floyd broke up in 1995. All the members of Pink Floyd, including Barrett, made some solo records. Barret died in 2006 & Richard Wright died in 2008.
