A pencil is a cylinder-shaped tool used to write and draw, usually on paper.
Structure.
A pencil is usually made with a piece of carbon mixed with clay that has a wood case around it. Coloured pencils are a type of pencil that instead of grey, the tip is a brighter color. Coloured pencils or crayons are usually meant for drawing rather than writing.
Pens and Pencils.
An important difference between pens and pencils is that pencil writings do not smudge or wash away if the paper gets wet. Writing with a pen will smudge. Writing from a pencil can be erased, but writing from a pen cannot and finally, while pens have been around for thousands of years, pencils have only been around since the 18th century.
History.
The first kind of pencil may have been the ancient Roman stylus, which was a thin metal stick used for scratching on papyrus, often made of lead. The word pencil comes from the Latin word "penicillus" which means "little tail".
In 1564, a very large deposit of graphite was found at the site of Seathwaite Fell near Borrowdale, Cumbria, England. The locals found that it was very useful for marking sheep. This particular deposit of graphite was extremely pure and solid and it could easily be sawed into sticks. This was and remains the only deposit of graphite ever found in this solid form. Chemistry was in its infancy and the substance was thought to be a form of lead. Because of this, it was called plumbago (Latin for "acts like lead"). The black core of pencils is still called "lead", even though it does not contain the element lead.
Soon, people realised that plumbago was worth a lot, mainly because it could be used to line the moulds for cannon balls, and the mines were taken over by the Crown and guarded. Graphite had to be smuggled out for use in pencils. Because the plumbago was soft, it required some form of case. Plumbago sticks were at first wrapped in string or in sheepskin. The news of the usefulness of these early pencils spread far and wide, attracting the attentions of artists all over the known world.
It was the Italians that first thought of wooden holders, at first by hollowing out a stick of juniper wood. Shortly after that, a better technique was discovered: two wooden halves were carved, a plumbago stick put in, and the two halves then glued together — almost the same method that is used today.
Other attempts.
The first attempt to manufacture graphite sticks from powdered graphite was in Nuremberg, Germany in 1662. They used a mixture of graphite, sulfur and antimony. Though usable they were inferior to the English pencils.
English and German pencils were not available to the French during the Napoleonic wars. It took the efforts of an officer in Napoleon's army to change this. In 1795 Nicholas Jacques Conté discovered a method of mixing powdered graphite with clay and forming the mixture into rods which were then fired in a kiln. By varying the ratio of graphite to clay, the hardness of the graphite rod could also be varied (the more clay, the harder the pencil, and the lighter the color of the mark). This method of making pencils remains in use today.
Modern day pencils.
Today, pencils are made industrially by mixing finely ground graphite and clay powders, adding water, forming long spaghetti-like strings, and firing them in a kiln. The resulting strings are dipped in oil or molten wax which seeps into the tiny holes of the material, resulting in smoother writing. A juniper or incense-cedar plank with several long parallel grooves is cut to make something called a slat, and the graphite/clay strings are inserted into the grooves. Another grooved plank is glued on top, and the whole thing is then cut into individual pencils, which are then varnished or painted.
