Quedlinburg is a City in the state of Saxony-Anhalt, Germany. The city covers an area of
. 22,795 people live there (2005). The place is located just 8 kilometers north of the Harz mountains. The small river called Bode is flowing through the city. In 1994 the UNESCO set the old town Quedlinburg on the list of World Heritage Sites.
History.
In the year 922 the name Quedlinburg was first mentioned in a paper from King Henry I the Fowler of Germany. In the first half of the 10th century the Hungarians with their horses attaced many place all over central Europe. King Henry build up a castle to give the farmers around a place to flee. In 936 the king died and his body was buried on the castles hill in Quedlinburg. His widow Matilda and his son King Otto I set up an convent für ladies. The tasks of this convent was to remind the memory of King Henry I and to educate young ladies to get better chaces to get married. This convent on the hill existed until it was dissolved in 1803. First abbess of the ladies-convent was Matilda the daughter of King Otto I and grand-daughter of Queen Matilda.
In the valley north of that hill in 994 King Otto III founded the old town. He was ask to do so from his aunt abbess Matilda.
This old town was used by merchants to sell and buy textiles and so it grow up. In the middle of the 12th century a new town was created by the abbess of the ladies-convent.
In 1330 both towns were united. They got stronger in power and in 1477 they tryed to get totaly independent from the abbess. But military troops from the brothers of the abbess occupied both towns.
All the citizens got under control of the abess again.
In 1541 the Protestant Reformation reached the convent and the town and everybody changed his beliefs to Protestant religion.
Surprisingly during the Thirty Years' War the town was not destroyed, because the abbess made diplomatic arrangements with all the bypassing military leaders.
Geography and Climate.
The city is located 8 kilometers north of the Harz mountains around 123 meters above sea level. The surroundig mountains reach abaout 180 meters above sea level. Most of the town is on the western site of the rivers Bode bank. The town area covers around 78,15 square kilometers.
The average temperature of the year is 8,8 degree. January and February are the coldest months of the year, with an average temperature of 0,1 °C and 0,4 °C. July and August are the hottest months, with an average temperature of 17,8 °C (63 °F) and 17,2 °C. The average annual rainfall is about 438 millimetres. The rain occurrs usually from May to September. This rainfall is one of the lowest in Germany, which has an annual average around 800 millimetres.
Sister cities.
Quedlinburg has partnerships with 5 cities. Each of the 5 boroughs also has their sister cities, sometimes called twin towns.
