Quantum mechanics explains how "very" small particles behave - like atoms and molecules and subatomic particles like protons, electrons, neutrons.
Some ideas in quantum mechanics can be used to know how small particles like the hydrogen atom come together to form big things like the stars in the sky, and even the whole Universe.
Some parts of the theory are controversial; they don't agree with other views in physics. For example, some results from quantum mechanics do not seem to agree with the theory of relativity.
Many people regard quantum mechanics as a difficult and confusing subject for several reasons. First, even a simple introduction to quantum mechanics requires an understanding of some very advanced mathematics such as differential equations and advanced calculus. Second, many of the ideas in quantum mechanics are only understood at a mathematical level -- physicists are not sure what some of the equations actually mean in the real world. Third, what we know about quantum mechanics suggests that atoms behave in strange ways that are totally unlike anything we see in our day to day lives.
Quantum mechanics describes nature in a way that is different from how we usually think about science, relying on chance rather than certainty (being sure). Physicists depend on the chance of an event, the result of an experiment, (what are the chances of it happening) instead of being sure about the outcome (what is going to happen). Probability can help a scientist guess the outcome of an experiment, like trying to guess the outcome of a game or guessing heads or tails when tossing a coin.
History.
Light was first thought to be made of particles. Isaac Newton called these particles "corpuscles". With this idea, he could explain how light behaved. Later, Christiaan Huygens thought that light was made of waves. These theories seemed to be conflicting with one another.
It turns out that both theories are correct - light is somehow both a wave and a particle. We call this "wave-particle duality". Scientists have since discovered that everything at the sub-atomic level can somehow behave like a wave and a particle.
The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.
In Quantum mechanics, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle says that the more we know about where something is, the less we can know about how fast it is going; in other words, the more we know about something's speed, the less we can know about its position. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle is not limited to position and speed, however. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle says that there are many situations where we can not know everything about an atom, no matter how hard we may try.
Photoelectric effect.
In 1905, Albert Einstein proved that although light is like a wave, it is made of particles of energy called photons. This came from the photoelectric effect.
This began quantum theory, where all subatomic particles like electrons, protons, neutrons, and others are both waves "and" particles at the same time. See picture of atom with the electron as waves at atom.
For other parts of quantum mechanics, see Schrödinger equation and quantum entanglement.
Observation.
A key part of quantum theory is that certain attributes of particles, such as position, speed, direction it moves in, and spin, are not defined until they are observed. It is instead in what is called a “superposition of states”.
Quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics is a science that deals with how the atoms and subatomic particles (particles that are smaller than atoms) in matter and waves behave. It forms a mathematical framework for modern physics and chemistry. It also helps to explain how large objects like stars and planets are formed and why big events in space happen, like the Big Bang.
"Quantum" in Latin means 'how much'. It is used in quantum mechanics to describe set units that the theory gives to different properties. The basic parts of quantum mechanics were made during the first half of the year 1900 by Max Planck, Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Erwin Schrödinger, Max Born, John von Neumann, Paul Dirac, Wolfgang Pauli and others.
Quantum mechanics was first developed to explain the atom, especially the light emitted by different types of atoms. The quantum theory of the atom developed as an explanation for the electron staying in its orbit, which could not be explained by other theories.
The other thing that led to quantum mechanics was the study of electromagnetic waves such as light. It was found in 1900 by Max Planck that the energy of waves could be described as made of small packets or "quanta". Albert Einstein used this idea to show that an electromagnetic wave such as light could be described by a particle called the photon with a set amount of energy, depending on its frequency. This led to a theory about subatomic particles and electromagnetic waves called "wave-particle duality". This is where particles and waves were neither one or the other, but had certain properties of both.
