Rain are droplets of water that fall from clouds in the sky. Droplets of water bigger than 0.5 mm are rain. Those the size of about 0.2-0.5 mm are drizzle. Rain is part of the water cycle and is a form of precipitation. Precipitation is any form of water falling from clouds/ the sky. Precipitation can be rain, hail, sleet or snow.
Convection rain.
Convection rain is found in hot wet places of the world. Sometimes, it is also found in tropical deserts and inland areas during summer, when temperatures are high. During daytime, the sun makes the ground very hot. Air near the ground surface is heated by conduction. The heated air expands, becoming less dense and rising in a strong upwards air current. When the temperature of the rising air falls to the dew point, water vapor shrinks into thick clouds and forms convection rain.
Relief rain".
Relief rain usually occurs along coastal areas where a line of hills runs along to the coast. When wet onshore wind from the sea meet a mountain, hill and barrier, it is forced to rise along the slope and cools. When the air temperature falls to its dew point, water vapor condenses to form clouds. When the clouds can no longer hold the water droplets, relief rain begins to fall on the windward slope of the mountain. On the leeward slope, air sinks, it is warmed and further dried by compression. Therefore, the leeward slope is known as rain shadow. Moist winds blow in from the sea and are forced to rise over the land. The air cools and the water vapour condenses, forming rain drops. Relief rain is also a very dense and cold mixture of precipitation.
Frontal rain is when a cold front meets a warm air front. The less dense warm air rises and condenses forming clouds. These clouds get heavier and it eventually rains. The cold air front tends to come from the north west and the warm air front comes from the south west.
Hot sun heats any water on the Ground. The Water from the ground is evaporated. Water vapor rise, cools and condenses at dew point.Cloud from and rain fall happens and then the whole thing happens again.
