is a Japan-only music video game/mini-game-collection. It was made by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance hand-held game console, and was later released in arcades. It was made by Nintendos' Research and Development 1. A sequel was released on the Nintendo DS called "Rhythm Tengoku Gold" in 2008.
Gameplay.
"Rhythm Tengoku" is a level-based music mini-game collection which has a total of five normal levels and one remix level for every set of levels, which total eight sets, 48 levels in all. The game is set up with mostly different levels - for example, the first level has the player punch objects and the second level has the player pluck hairs out of an onion, both in the beat to the music that they use. The player has to beat one level to go onto to the next. When he or she has beaten all five levels in a set, a remix appears, which is a level that has the five levels in the set remixed into one, using a different song. "Rhythm Tengoku" starts with a Rhythm Test that checks how well the player's beat is.
At the end of the level, the player is awarded one of three ranks - High Level, Mediocre, and Redo. If the player gets anything but Redo, the level is cleared, and getting High Level in a level gets the player a Perfect Campaign, which unlocks stuff in the "Bonus Corner" depending on how many the player unlocks.
After the player beats enough levels, the game lets him or her try to get a perfect score, which gets the player a heart on the level he or she beats. The game tells the player when a level can have a heart won on it.
Besides the main game, there are six side features - the Cafe, the Toys, the Games, the Drum Lessons, the Staff, and the Live mode. The Cafe is used for advice, while the Toys, Games, and Drum Lessons have unlockable mini-games that can be played. The Staff mode shows the game's credits, and Live is a mode where the player plays in a band and is the drummer.
Drum Lessons.
The Drum Lessons mode teaches the player how to play the drums in "Rhythm Tengoku". The teacher, Drum Samurai, shows the player a short song that he or she must copy exactly. Drums use all of the buttons except for Start and Select, each button being a different part of the drum. The player is shown how well he or she did at the end and is given a rank. The drums can be played in the Studio mode, where the player can take any song in the game and play the drums to it. The drums are also used in the Live mode.
Music.
All music tracks in the game was made for it by Tsunku, the game's composer. Because the Game Boy Advance can only do so much, most of the music is limited, and only a few songs have lyrics.
A soundtrack is going to be released October 15, 2008 with 140 songs from this game and its sequel, "Rhythm Tengoku Gold".
Development.
Tsunku contributed more than 30 soundtracks, and worked with Nintendo's Yoshio Sakamoto in making the game. It was not known until the game's release that Tsunku was involved with the game, with the Drum Samurai being based on him. Because it was developed by R&D1, it looks like and plays like the "WarioWare" series.
Reception.
"Rhythm Tengoku" has received many positive reviews. EuroGamer called it "effortlessly entertaining," or said that the game was very fun without putting too much work into it. Edge said it was a best takes on rhythm games and one of the last good Game Boy Advance games.
"Rhythm Tengoku" received an Excellence Prize for Entertainment at the 10th annual Japan Media Arts Festival in 2006.
By the end of 2006, "Rhythm Tengoku" sold a total of 282,879 copies and was the 43rd best-selling game of that year.
Arcade version.
Nintendo and Sega made an arcade version of "Rhythm Tengoku" that had multiplayer, which the Game Boy Advance version didn't have. It has all the same levels as in the Game Boy Advance version, but it has a new mode that lets the first six games be played at a faster tempo.
Sequel.
Nintendo released a sequel to "Rhythm Tengoku" called "Rhythm Tengoku Gold" on July 31, 2008 for the Nintendo DS. It's made by the same people who made this game. It uses the DS' touch screen instead of the buttons, and the DS is held sideways. Because the DS is much more advanced than the Game Boy Advance, "Rhythm Tengoku Gold" has more levels, as well as letting the composer, Tsunku, make more detailed music. While "Rhythm Tengoku" has only been sold in Japan, "Rhythm Tengoku Gold" is coming to North America and PAL regions this year as "Rhythm Heaven".
