A robot is a machine or a computer program which seems to have a life of its own.
There are many books, movies, and video games with robots in them.
Eastern Thoughts on Robots.
Roughly half of all the robots in the world are in Asia, 32% in Europe, and 16% in North America, 1% in Australasia and 1% in Africa. 40% of all the robots in the world are in Japan. This means that Japan has the most robots in the world out of all the countries, and is in fact leading the world's robotics. Japan is actually said to be the robotic capital of the world.
In Japan and South Korea, ideas of future robots have been mainly positive, and the start of the pro-robotic society there is thought to be possibly due to the famous 'Astroboy'. China has also recently expressed similar views on robotics to Japan and South Korea, but is at the moment behind America and Europe in robotic development. The East (Japan, South Korea, and more recently, China) believes robots to be more equal to humans, having them care for old people, play with or teach children, or replace pets etc. In fact, they believe that they have souls, mostly due to the religious influences of the country. The general view of the East is that the more robots advance, the better, which is the opposite of the Western belief.
"This is the opening of an era in which human beings and robots can co-exist," says Japanese firm Mitsubishi about one of the many humanistic robots in Japan.
In this sense, people in Japan are much more likely to be affected by Technosexuality, as they are much more exposed to robots in their society. South Korea aims to put a robot in every house there by 2015-2020 in order to help catch up technologically with Japan. This will obviously have an impact on the technosexuality of South Korea. China, like South Korea, wishes to catch up with Japan, and has been developing robots very quickly. After China becomes more developed, and each person has more money to view the media, where robots could be seen, or to buy robots, as is happening in Japan and South Korea, technosexuality will probably rise there too, when considering the current oppinions of the people of robots.
With a limited number of robots in the rest of the world away from Japan, and even in Japan too, movies and literature are the where most of the technosexuality will be towards. Futuristic images/descriptions or robots may encourage technosexuality. At the moment, there are not that many real human-like robots in the world. The most human-like robot in the world, 'Actroid', made my Japanese company 'Kokoro' a division of 'Sanrio', is a good example of the target for technosexuality.
Western Thoughts on Robots.
Western societies are more likely to be against, or even fear the development of robotics, through much media output in movies and literature that they will replace humans.
The West regards robots as a 'threat' to the future of humans, which is also muchly due to religious influence of the Abrahamic religions, in which creating machines that can think for themselves would almost be playing God. Obviously, these boundaries are not clear, but there is a significant difference between the two ideologies.
'RealDoll' is a lifesize sex-doll sold in America, that can be sold with robotic implants. People who feel sexually attracted, or have sex with these, are technosexual. However, one important thing to notice is that this American machine does not move and think by itself, unlike their Japanese and South Korean counterparts. Therefore, it is apparent that the Western technosexuals prefer to be in control of the robot, while the Eastern technosexuals find themselves more equal to the robot.
Robot Laws.
The writer Isaac Asimov wrote three robot laws in his writing.
There is another law however, it is, a robot must not establish an identity with a human other than their creator.
These were not used in real life. However, in today's world, where robots are more common, real laws are needed to be drawn up about them, often with some basis in Isaac Asimov's original three laws.
South Korea is the first country in the world to put laws on robots.
