The reindeer ("Rangifer tarandus") is an even-toed ungulate mammal of the deer family. In North America it is also called caribou.
There are about 10-20 reindeer subspecies. The reindeer is the only deer that has been domesticated.
Appearance.
The different reindeer subspecies have different sizes and slightly different fur colors. Male reindeer are usually bigger and heavier than the females. Reindeer are about 1.20 - 2.20 meters long and about 0.90 - 1.40 meters high. They weigh between 60 - 300 kilograms. Reindeer mostly have a grey-brown fur. The fur is dark in summer and becomes a lighter color in winter. Reindeer are the only deer where both sexes have antlers. The antlers of female reindeer are smaller than the antlers of males. Reindeer also have big feet, which helps them walk on soft ground.
Range.
The reindeer live in Lapland (Northern Finland, Sweden, Norway and Russia), North America (called caribou), and Siberia. In Lapland and Siberia they are first domesticated.
Habitat.
Reindeer live in coniferous forest and arctic conditions.
Life.
Reindeer eat mostly grass, but eat also almost any other plant. In winter they often eat Reindeer lichen, moss and fungi.
Reindeer are herd animals and live in groups. They live in groups of 10-100 reindeer, which are herds of only females or herds of only males. Reindeer go on long journeys between the warm and cold seasons. For this journeys the smaller groups form big herds of up to several 100,000 animals. Reindeer mate in October, and the males mate with as many females as possible.
After a pregnancy of 230 days the female gives birth to a single baby, usually in May or June. Reindeer babies do not have spots on their fur, like most other deer babies have. Young reindeer become mature when they are 2 year old. Reindeer usually become 12-15 years old, sometimes they can become 20 years old.
Reindeer and humans.
Reindeer have been hunted by humans since the stone age. People, especially in the northern regions, used the reindeer's meat, fur, skin, antlers and bones.
The reindeer was domesticated about 3 thousand years ago. It was first domesticated in Siberia and Scandinavia. Since then, reindeer have also been used for transport, for example for pulling sleds. Because reindeer can live in very cold climates, domesticated reindeer are used in most northern parts of the world.
The "Sami" people in Lapland use Reindeer for fur, and food.
In western/European culture it is said that Santa Claus' sled is pulled by reindeer.
