Rose Marion Tyler is a character in the British television series "Doctor Who". She was played by Billie Piper. Rose was a companion of the the Doctor.
The character was created by series producer Russell T Davies. When "Doctor Who" was returned to television in 2005, Rose was introduced in the as a new "companion" of series protagonist the Doctor, in his Ninth and later Tenth bodies. A regular companion of the Doctor for all of series one and series two, Rose also returned in the programme's fourth series having Changed in the gap bertween them.
Series 1.
When first seen, Rose is 19 years old and working in a shop named Henrik's. She has a boyfriend named Mickey Smith, and lives in a apartment with her mother Jackie Tyler in the Powell Estate in London. Rose left school without taking her A-levels but won the bronze medal in an under-sevens gymnastics competition at her school. Her father, Pete Tyler died in 1987 in a car accident, the year after Rose was born. When she was twelve, she received a red bicycle for Christmas, which was given to her by the Doctor after meeting Rose in the future.
Ninth Doctor saves her from alians named Autons then he destroy the building. She helps the Doctor to defeat the autons then decides to travel with him.
While they are travelling, the Doctor and Rose realise that the words "Bad Wolf" follow them around. It is revealed that Rose herself is the Bad Wolf, the words being a message that she must return to the future to absorb the energies of the time vortex, saving the Doctor and the Earth from the Daleks. By absorbing the power of the TARDIS, she destroy the Daleks, Brings Captian Jack Back to life and leaves The words Bad wolf through the universe leave the clues seen throughout the series.
Soon the energies she absorbed begin to destroy her body. The Doctor, through a kiss, absorbs the power, sacrificing his ninth incarnation and regenerating before Rose's eyes into the Tenth Doctor.
Series 2.
During series 2 Rose become very close to the Doctor but he suddenly has to leave him when she traps in a parerel universe.
Series 4.
Rose makes a number of little, non-speaking appearances throughout series four.
In "Turn Left", when a Time Beetle causes Donna to change the past and change the universe, Rose continually appears to her and helps her to set things right by sending her back in time. She also gives Donna the message "Bad Wolf" to deliver to the Doctor, which tells him that it is the end of the universe. Rose is reunited with the Doctor in "The Stolen Earth", but as the two run towards each other, the Doctor is shot down by a Dalek. A sad Rose, reunited with Jack Harkness for the first time since she resurrected him in "The Parting of the Ways", is forced to watch the Doctor begin to regenerate again.
In "Journey's End" the Doctor regenerates just enough to heal himself,moving the rest of his 'Time Lord' regenerative energy into his hand that was cut off in the series two episode "The Christmas Invasion". Donna later touches the hand, causing a biological metacrisis, this causes the hand to develop into a human/time lord version of the Doctor, complete with the Doctor's memories, personality and knowledge, but exhibiting traits of Donna's personality, only one heart and he can't regenerate. The original Doctor returns Rose to her alternate universe's Bad Wolf Bay. Between themselves, the original Doctor and the half-human Doctor have decided that the half-human Doctor will stay with Rose; this Doctor can give Rose a romantic relationship, as he will age and die as a human rather than greatly outliving her like his Time Lord counterpart would. The Doctor tells Rose that his half-human self needs her as he was "born of blood and fire and revenge" much like his previous body was after the Time War. He believes Rose can help turn him into a "better man". When the half-human Doctor seemingly completes the sentence the original Doctor started at the end of "Doomsday" they kiss each other. And although we do not hear what the half-human Doctor had whispered to Rose, executive producer Julie Gardner confirmed in Doctor Who Confidential that "even though we don't hear it, of course he's saying 'I love you'."
The Doctor then leaves Rose and her Doctor in their parallel universe, the walls once again sealed.
