Ravenscraig is an area of land in North Lanarkshire, Scotland. It used to be the site for steelworks. Ravenscraig used to have the largest steel mill in Western Europe. Ravenscraig was closed in 1992, and is now almost totally demolished.
Ravenscraig is now at the start of a major redevelopment by Wilson Bowden Developments Ltd, Scottish Enterprise and Corus, to create a full new town.
Location.
Ravenscraig is very easy to get to. More than two—thirds of Scotland’s population live within 90 minutes drive.
Located in North Lanarkshire, Ravenscraig is between the towns of Wishaw and Motherwell, who house a population of over 60,000.
Ravenscraig lies only a few minutes drive from both the M74 and the M8 motorways which lead to Glasgow and Edinburgh, Scotland's two largest cities, allowing easy access for commuters and visitors to the area.
History.
Another steel maker, Colvilles, decided to expand their business in July 1954. They were the largest steel manufacturer before World War II.
In 1954, Colvilles began the first stages of development in Ravenscraig. Turning Ravenscraig from an empty field into a site for steelworks. By 1957 most of the machinery was built and by 1959 the full building work was complete.
The closure of Ravenscraig in 1993 was the end of large scale steel making in Scotland; and was the cause of a loss of 770 jobs, and another 10,000 job losses directly and indirectly linked.
Current State.
In its current state, Ravenscraig is one of the largest derelict sites in Europe measuring over 1125 acres in size, an area equivalent to 700 football pitches or twice the size of Monaco.
Future Plans.
After many years of planning, Ravenscraig will be rebuilt by three equal companies: Wilson Bowden Developments Ltd, Scottish Enterprise and Corus and will be one of the largest regenerations in Europe, with 400 acres being developed.
Part of the development will be to create new habitats for the wildlife already living in the area, such as deer, foxes, hares, otters, badgers, watervoles, butterflies and many birds.An "Ecological Clerk of Works" has been appointed to make sure the building works do not affect wildlife.
It is hoped that the £29million redevelopment of the sports complex will be used as training camps for the 2012 London Olympics and the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow.
There are many people who disagree with the building work. Many local residents and small businesses think that it will take jobs and customers from other towns.
Transport.
As part of the changes, the transport to Ravenscraig will be improved. There will be new transport within walking distance of the new town centre. With new bus services to Glasgow and Lanark. There will be easy access to public transport throughout the site including dedicated business routes. These will link to the public transport network with roads to the Motherwell and Carfin rail stations..
Motherwell FC.
Local press has suggested that the local Scottish Premier League football team, Motherwell Football Club could buy some land in Ravenscraig to build a new football stadium, leaving behind their home of 113 years, Fir Park. Motherwell Chairman, John Boyle has said "No decisions have been taken and we are simply exploring realistic options at this stage."
