RuneScape is a game that is played on a computer. Many people play RuneScape all at the same time, which makes it a Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game (or MMORPG). It began in 2001, and is owned by Jagex Ltd. It is set in a fantasy land that reminds some people of Medieval times.
History.
The game first started in 2001 as "Runescape" (now referred to as "RuneScape Classic"), but the code and graphics engine was rewritten in 2004 to form "Runescape 2", the game that is playable today from. The game is designed to allow players all over the world to connect and play together in real-time. There are over 160,000 people playing the game at any one time, and 200,000 at peak times such as weekends. Runescape was one of the first online games to allow people to play against each other. This is called "player versus player", or PvP.
Development.
The game was originally made by Andrew Gower. He created a game named "DeviousMUD" in 1998. DeviousMud used two dimensional graphics. It was never released to the public. RuneScape uses both 2D isometric graphics and three dimensional graphics.
Jagex was formed soon after. It stands for Java Gaming Experts. Andrew Gower is head of development.
Gameplay.
The RuneScape world has many different areas and places where players can explore and do activities such as quests or training a skill. RuneScape skills are abilities than players can train to be able to do special things. Smithing and Smelting are examples of skills than can allow a player to create metal items.
Cost.
RuneScape is a "free" online game. Like most free online games, the free version is very basic, and there is an option to become a paying player and buy more features. RuneScape is played on 159 servers. Each server can have up to 2,000 people playing on it at a time.
As an optional service, Pay to play members must pay $6 USD per month. Members get a larger area to play in, use of 8 extra skills, 6 times the space in the game's bank, and access to member only weapons, tools, and armor. There are over one million (1,000,000) members in Runescape.
Weapons, Armor, and Shields.
Like most MMORPGs, RuneScape has weapons, armor and shields. Weapons, armor and shields can be made out of many things. Common materials for items include bronze, iron, steel, black, mithril, adamantite, rune, granite, and dragon. Some of these materials can be obtained by mining rocks that contain ore. Players can then create items from the ore by smelting the ore using the smelt skill into bars and then use the bar and smith it using the smith skill. There are also other armors that can not be made but must be gotten through methods such as trade or quests. Some members only weapons have special abilities to help the player, such as the abyssal whip and the dragon scimitar.
Player Killing.
RuneScape has a Player Killing part in the game. Special world servers called PvP worlds allow players to attack other players within a near level group to their own in almost the same way they can attack other players. Players in these worlds can attack each other anywhere except in certain places such as banks and some guilds. Player killing also takes place in some mini-games but it is different from main player killing because in mini-games, there are different rules that control player killing.
