Romania (dated: Rumania, Roumania;,) is a country that can be found in the south-eastern part of Central Europe. It is found to the north of the Balkan Peninsula, on the Lower Danube. It is also within and outside the Carpathian arch, and is bordering the Black Sea. Most of the Danube Delta is found inside Romania. It shares a border with Hungary and Serbia to the west, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova to the northeast, and Bulgaria to the south.
Romania is a semi-presidential unitary state. Romania was made by the joining of Moldavia and Wallachia in 1859. It was given its independence in the 1878. At the end of World War II, some of its territories (around what is now known as Moldova) was occupied by the USSR.
After the Iron Curtain fell in 1989, Romania started political and economical reforms that let Romania join the European Union on 1 January 2007.
Romania has the 9th biggest territory and the 7th biggest population (with 22 million people) of the European Union member states. The capital and biggest city in Romania is Bucharest (), with a population of 1.9 million people. One of the cities in Transylvania, Sibiu, was named a European Capital of Culture. Romania also joined NATO on March 29, 2004.
Origin.
"Romania" ("Rumania" or "România") comes from the Romanian word "Român", which comes from the Latin word "Romanus" ("Roman"). English sources still used the word Rumania during World War II. This comes from the French word "Roumania". This is the last known mention.
Prehistory and Antiquity.
The oldest human remains to have been found in Europe were found in Romania. They were about 42,000 years old. Being that they are Europe's oldest human remains, this may have been when the first people came to Europe.
The first written proof of people living in what is now Romania comes from Herodotus in the fourth book of his Histories (Herodotus). The book was written in about 440 BCE. He wrote that the Getae were defeated by the Persian Emperor Darius the Great when he was battling the Scythians. Dacians, who were mostly thought of as a part of the Getae, were part of the Thracians who were living in Dacia (which is where Romania, Moldova and the northern part of Bulgaria are).
The Roman Empire first noticed Dacia when they attacked the Roman province, which was bordered by the Danube, in 87 AD. This was during Emperor Domitian's rule. In time, the Dacians were finished by the Roman Empire under Emperor Trajan in two battles that lasted from 101 AD until 106 AD. After the Dacians were defeated, the Roman Empire turned Dacia into the province of Roman Dacia.
A lot of very good ore deposits were found in Roman Dacia. There was a lot of gold and silver found in Roman Dacia, and a large portion of gold and silver were found in the Western Carpathians. Trajan brought home 165 tons of gold and 330 tons of silver when he returned home after his conquest.
The Romans had a lot of people living in the colony of Roman Dacia, and brought with them Vulgar Latin, which they started to put a lot of effort into romanization. This was to become the first version of Romanian.
In the 3rd century, several new kinds of people that moved around a lot made the Roman Empire leave Dacia near 271 AD. This became the Roman Empire's first abandoned province.
The origin of modern Romanians is widely debated by historians to this day. It is thought that the Romanians were formed from big ethnic groups that came from both the south and north of the Danube.
Middle Ages.
In 271 or 275 AD, the Goths took over the abandoned Roman province. They lived in Dacia until the 4th century, when another group of wandering peoples, the Huns, came to Dacia.
The Gepids, and the Avars with the Slavic people, was in control of Transylvania through the 8th century. In the 8th century, however, it was overrun by Bulgarians, where it was made part of the First Bulgarian Empire, which ended Romania's Dark Ages. The Bulgarians held Transylvania until the 11th century. The Pechenegs, the Cumans, and the Uzes were a few of the people later noted in the history of Romania.
In 1310, Basarab I started the Romanian principalities of Wallachia in what were called the High Middle Ages and Moldavia by Dragoş around 1352.
During the Middle Ages, Romanians were living in three different areas: Wallachia (Romanian: "Ţara Românească"—"Romanian Land"), Moldavia (Romanian: "Moldova") and Transylvania. Transylvania belonged to the Kingdom of Hungary from around the 10th century until the 16th century, when it turned into the Principality of Transylvania. The Principality of Transylvania lasted until 1711.
Wallachia has always been on the border of the Ottoman Empire since the 14th century. As the Ottoman Empire's influence grew, it gradually fell under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire in the 15th century. The best known ruler of this period was Vlad III the Impaler (also known as Vlad Dracula or ',), Prince of Wallachia during the years of 1448, 1456–62, and 1476.
While he was the leader of his people, he had a pact with the Ottoman Empire to stay independent. Many people in Romania during this time thought of him as a ruler with a great sense of justice and defense for his country.
Moldavia was seeing its' best of times when Stephen the Great was ruling Moldavia between 1457 and 1504. He was a very good leader of the military (He won 47 battles, and lost 2)). After every battle he won, Stephen would build a church. Because he won 47 of the battles that he fought, he ended up building 48 churches. After Stephen the Great's death, Moldavia became under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire during the 16th century.
Independence and monarchy.
When the Austro-Hungarian Empire was in control of Transylvania, and the Ottoman Empire was in control of Wallachia and Moldavia, almost all of the Romanians were second-class citizens or non-citizens. They stayed this way even when they made up most of the people in those areas.
In 1848, the 1848 Revolution did not succeed, and the Great Powers did not like the idea of Romania becoming an independent nation. The people who chose who was elected in 1859 in Moldavia and Wallachia picked the same person – Alexandru Ioan Cuza – as the prince in those areas. This made Romania into a personal union, which happens when the same person rules two different areas. The personal union did not include Transylvania, because most of the people that were living there in the upper class were still Hungarian.
In 1866, a "coup d'état" resulted in Cuza being exiled or not allowed into that part of the country. Prince Karl of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen became the prince after the exile, and was later called Prince Carol of Romania. While the Russo-Turkish War was happening, Romania battled on the Russian side. When the 1878 Treaty of Berlin, was signed, it made Romania an independent state by the Great Powers. However, they had to give Russia three of their southern districts of of Bessarabia. In 1881, the principality became a kingdom with Prince Carol ruling as its' King Carol I.
World War I.
During August of the year 1914, when World War I started, Romania said it was a neutral country. In 1916, after pressure from the Allies, Romania joined the Allies. Romania then started a war with Austria-Hungary.
The Romanian military campaign was really bad for Romania. The Central Powers took over most of the country. Much of the Romanian army were either captured or killed over four months. Moldova was one of the only parts of Romania that was not captured when it stopped its' attackers in 1917. By the time World War I was over, Austria-Hungary and the Russian Empire had fallen apart. This event allowed Bessarabia, Bukovina and Transylvania to become part of the Kingdom of Romania again in 1918. After the Treaty of Trianon was signed in 1920, Hungary, as agreed, gave up the claims of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy over Transylvania. Romania and Bukovina were joined together in 1919 as a result of the Treaty of Saint Germain. Bessarabia joined with Romania in 1920 when the Treaty of Paris was signed.
Greater Romania.
The words România Mare (which means "Great Romania" when translated directly from the Romanian language, but usually is translated as "Greater Romania") is what people called Romania during the time between wars. They called Romania România Mare because Romania was in control of (almost 300,000 square kilometers) of land. This was the most land that Romania was ever in control of.
World War II.
In World War II, Romania called itself neutral. However, on 28 June 1940, a Soviet ultimatum said that they would invade Romania if they didn't join the Axis. Because of the pressure from Moscow and Berlin, they left Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to avoid war. This, along with other events, made Romania think about joining the Axis powers. As a result, Bulgaria was given the southern part of Dobruja while Hungary was given Northern Transylvania. This loss of land caused King Carol II, the king of Romania at the time, to abdicate the throne in 1940. The National Legionary State then came into power. Power without the National Legionary State was shared by Ion Antonescu and the Iron Guard. Ion Antonescu then defeated the Iron Guard and a year later, Romania joined the war on the Axis Power's side. Over the course of World War II, Romania was the source for most of the oil of Nazi Germany. This caused many bombing raids (where airplanes attempted to drop bombs on important places) by the Allies. Ion Antonescu's rule played a big part in the Halocaust.
During August of the year 1944, Antonescu lost power and was arrested by King Michael I of Romania. As a result of this, Romania changed sides and joined the Allies. However, even though they helped to defeat Nazi Germany, they were not noted in the Paris Peace Conference of 1947. People of the Red Army stayed in the country and Communists got most of the votes using some forms of cheating. This included tampering with the votes and killing other party members that didn't agree with them. This gave them control of the country. By the end of the war, 300,000 people in the Romanian Army were killed.
Romania and communism.
King Michael I was abdicated and had the leave Romania in 1947 because of the Communists. Romania was then called a republic. The USSR kept control of Romania until late in the 1950s, when the Soviet troops agreed to leave Romania. During this time, resources in Romania dropped a lot because of agreements made by the communists.
After the Soviet troops left Romania, Nicolae Ceauşescu wanted Romania to become independent. Because of this, Romania started following independent policies like opening talks with Israel after the Six-Day War in 1967 and starting relations with the Federal Republic of Germany.. Romania also started to make friends with the Arab countries. By being friends with the Arab countries, Romania was allowed take part in peace talks between Israel and Egypt and between Israel and the PLO. These caused the amount of money that Romania owed to other countries to go up from 3 billion dollars to nearly 10 billion dollars between the years of 1977 and 1981. The amount of debt that Romania owed other countries caused them to rely on banks and other such companies from around the world. This fought with Nicolae Ceauşescu's autarchic ways and caused him to want to give back all the money that they got from the companies. This caused Romanians to become poor and took out the economy. These events caused Ceauşescu to be taken out of power and killed in the Romanian Revolution of 1989.
1989 to present day.
In 1989, the National Salvation Front came into power. It was led by Ion Iliescu. When they came into power, several other parties from before the war were born again. These included the Christian-Democratic National Peasants' Party, the National Liberal Party and the Romanian Social Democrat Party. During April of the year 1990, As a result of several rallies, protests started. The people who protested did not recognize the results of the election. This was because they thought that members of the National Salvation Front were Communists. More and more people protested, and it became a demonstration, or a big protest. These were called Golaniad. After a time, the demonstration turned violent.
When the Front lost power, several other parties came into being. These included the Social Democratic Party, the Democratic Party, as well as some other pre-war parties. The Social Democratic Party ruled Romania from 1990 until the year 1996. Ion Iliescu was the head of state, or person in charge. After the year 1996, several other parties came into power and lost it. In 2004, Traian Băsescu was elected president.
After the Cold War, Romania became closer friends with Western Europe. In 2004, Romania joined NATO and hosted the 2008 summit. The country applied in June 1993 for membership in the European Union and became an Associated State of the EU in 1995, an Acceding Country in 2004, and a member on January 1, 2007.
Geography.
Romania is found in the southeastern part of Europe. It borders the Black Sea and the Danube. The Carpathian Mountains lie in the center.
Romania is the biggest country in southeastern Europe by number of people. It has an area of. It is the twelfth-largest country in Europe. Most of Romania's border with Serbia and Bulgaria is made by the Danube. The Danube is joined by the Prut River. The Prut River makes the border with the Republic of Moldova. The Danube then flows into the area of the Black Sea inside of Romania. This makes the Danube Delta. It is a biosphere reserve and a biodiversity World Heritage Site. Some of the other major rivers in Romania are the Siret, the Olt, and the Mureş. The Siret River runs from the north to the south of Moldavia. The Olt River runs from the Carpathian Mountains to Oltenia. The Mureş runs through Transylvania from the east to the west.
Landscape.
The land in Romania is equal parts mountainous, hilly and low-lying areas. The Carpathian Mountains make up a big part of the center of Romania. 14 of its mountain ranges are taller than 2,000 meters. The tallest mountain in Romania is Moldoveanu Peak ().
Rivers.
The Danube is the longest river in Romania. It travels about 1,075 kilometers through Romania. That is almost half of its' length. Nearly all of the rivers in Romania are either direct or indirect tributaries of the Danube.
Weather.
Romania has a climate that changes between temperate and continental climates. The reason for the climate changes is because of where Romania is found in relation to the coast. Romania has four different seasons. The average temperature during the year is 11°C in the southern part of Romania and in the northern part.
Lots of rain, snow, and other precipitation falls on the highest western mountains. Most of this falls as snow. This makes Romania have good skiing. In the south-centern parts of the country, the amount of rain and snow that falls is around. In the Danube Delta, not much rain falls.
The lowest temperature ever recorded in Romania was -37.3°F, which was found near Braşov in the year 1944. The highest temperature ever recorded in Romania was 112°F, which was found near Calafat in the 1950s.
Society.
In the year 2002, Romania had a population of around 21,698,181 people. Romanians make up 89.5% of the population. There are a few other minorities in Romania. Hungarians make up about 6.5% of the population in Romania. The Romas make up about 2.5% of the people that live in Romania. In Transylvania, A lot of Hungarians live there. They also make up a big part of the counties Harghita and Covasna. Ukrainians, Germans, Lipovans, Turks, Tatars, Serbs, Slovaks, Bulgarians, Croats, Greeks, Russians, Jews, Czechs, Poles, Italians, Armenians, and a few other denominations are what the rest of the people are made up of in Romania.
Language.
The official language of Romania is Romanian. The Romanian language is an Eastern Romance language. It is similar to the Italian, French, Spanish, Portuguese and Catalan languages. 91% of the population of Romania speaks Romanian as their first language. Hungarian and Rroma are the most important minority languages in Romania.
Religion.
Romania is a secular state. This means Romania has no national religion. The biggest religious body in Romania is the Romanian Orthodox Church. It is an autocephalous church inside of the Eastern Orthodox communion. This religion made up 86.7% of the population, as of the year 2002. Other religion in Romania include Roman Catholicism (4.7%), Protestantism (3.7%), Pentecostalism (1.5%) and the Romanian Greek-Catholic Church (0.9%).
Cities.
Bucharest is the capital of Romania. It also is the biggest city in Romania, with a population of over 1.9 million people.
There are five other cities in Romania that have a population of more than 300,000 people. The five cities are: Iaşi, Cluj-Napoca, Timişoara, Constanţa, and Craiova. Romania also has five cities that have more than 200,000 people living in them. They include: Galaţi, Braşov, Ploieşti, Brăila and Oradea. Thirteen other cities in Romania have a population of more than 100,000 people.
Monuments.
The UNESCO List of World Heritage Sites includes Romanian sites like the Saxon villages with fortified churches in Transylvania, the painted churches of northern Moldavia, the Wooden Churches of Maramures, the Monastery of Horezu, the citadel of Sighişoara, and the Dacian Fortresses of the Orăştie Mountains. The reason why Romania stands out in its usage of World Heritage Sites is the fact that they are spread out all over the country, instead of being found all in one place.
Culture.
Romania has its own culture, mainly because of where it is located. It is this way because it is the point where three different areas meet: Central Europe, Eastern Europe, and the Balkans. These cannot be included in any of those areas.
Most of the influences that came to Romania during the old times until the Middle Ages were from Slavic people.
Folk music of Romania.
Romanian culture is very large: pan flutes, cymbals, alphorns etc. These are folk instruments. Folklore music of Romania influenced the Romanian classical music. The culture of Romania was influenced by the Greeks, Romans, and Slavs.
Gheorghe Zamfir is a Romanian singer who sings folklore songs using the panflute. The alphorn is used in Carpathians to communicate over long distances. There are also many traditional dances, for example: "Sârba", "Hora"(round dance), and Brâu.
Classical music.
The best known Romanian composer is George Enescu, well-known for the Romanian Rapsodies (see also:List of Romanians composers). The Romanian composer Ion Ivanovici composed the waltz "Waves of Danube".
Literature.
A famous Romanian writer is Mihai Eminescu, a writer who wrote poems. Ion Creanga, another writer, wrote many stories and memories. The most famous creation is "Amintiri din copilarie"(Memories from chilhood).(See also:List of Romanian writers)
Economy.
Romania joined the European Union on January 1, 2007. As of now, Romanias' economy is doing all right. Currently, Romania makes around $264 billion in Gross domestic product and a GDP per capita of $12,285. This hasn't always been the case, though.
In 1989, after the Communists left Romania, Romanias' economy was in very bad shape. Unemployment was high and the whole economic system was not there and needed help. This period of having a bad economy lasted for about 10 years. In 2000, the people who lead Romania finally started making changes to the economy and the system. People started being able to work again and inflation went down.
Divisions.
Romania is divided into 41 counties, and the municipality of Bucharest, which is its own county.
Romania is divided more into 319 cities and 2,686 communes. Each of the communes has its own council that is led by a mayor.
