The Royal Canadian Air Cadets is a program for Canadian youth. It is supported by sponsors in the community and Canada's Canadian Forces funded by the Department of National Defence. There are about 450 Air Cadet squadrons in every province and territory in Canada. The two other cadet programs for youth in Canada are the Royal Canadian Sea Cadets and the Royal Canadian Army Cadets.
People between the ages of 12 and 18 can join this program for free, and they are led by the officers of the Canadian Forces Cadet Instructor Cadre.
Aims and Motto.
The aim of the Air Cadets is to "develop in youth the attributes of good citizenship and leadership; promote physical fitness; and to stimulate the interest of youth in the sea, land and air activities of the Canadian Forces."
Ranking.
The rank system in Air Cadets is founded in that ranking system used by the former Royal Canadian Air Force with some modifications. Royal Canadian Air Cadets are not part of the Canadian Forces and don't have to join the Canadian forces.
1) Air Cadet (AC)- When people first join Air Cadets, they get the rank of an Air Cadet.
2) Leading Air Cadet (LAC)- After someone joins and often takes part in the Air Cadet training for five months, they hold the rank of a leading Air Cadet.
A corporal is a non-commissioned officer. To become a corporal, an air cadet has to be a Leading Air Cadet (LAC) first, and finish Level 1 of Air Cadets successfully.
A new rank recently introduced in Sept 2007 as the first earned position of the chain of command. It is required that you have received the rank of corporal and successfully completed level 2.
To become a sergeant, an Air Cadet to be a flight corporal for at least 6 months and successfully finish Level 2 training in air cadets. It is better is they also complete a Familiarization Summer Course, but a cadet does not have to take this course to become a Sergeant.
To become a Flight Sergeant, an Air Cadet must be a sergeant for six months and successfully complete the level three training. They do not have to take and complete a Introductory Speciality Summer Course, but it is not mandatory.
