Radioactive decay is the process where the nucleus of an atom changes into another type of nucleus and produces a particle at the same time. Nuclei which change like this are called radioactive or unstable. This change happens to the nucleus of an atom. Most atoms on earth are not radioactive. Only some types of atom are radioactive.
Radioactive decay always changes the type of atom from an isotope that has higher energy inside its nucleus to an isotope with lower energy in its nucleus. The difference in energy between the nucleus before and after the decay goes into the particles created in the decay. Energy is not created or destroyed in radioactive decay.
Alpha decay, beta decay and gamma decay are the most common types of radioactive decay. They are different from each other because different types of decay produce different particles. The starting radioactive nucleus is called the parent nucleus and the nucleus that it changes into is called the daughter nucleus. The high-energy particles produced by radioactive materials are called radiation.
Alpha decay.
During alpha decay, the atomic nucleus releases an alpha particle. The nucleus will lose two protons and two neutrons when this happens. After the decay, the atom will change to another element, because the atom loses two protons. For example, if Americium were to go through Alpha decay it would change into Neptunium because Neptunium is defined by have two protons less than Americium. Alpha decay usually happens in heavy elements, such as uranium, thorium, plutonium, and radium.
Alpha particles cannot even go through a few centimeters of air. Alpha irradiation does not hurt human skin, because skin does not let the alpha particles go through. Alpha radiation is very harmful to people who inhale dust or gas containing materials which decay by emitting alpha particles.
Beta decay.
There are two kinds of beta decay, beta-plus and beta-minus.
Beta-plus decay happens inside the sun and in some types of particle accelerators.
Beta-minus decay happens in nuclear reactors.
Gamma decay.
Gamma decay happens when a nucleus produces a high-energy packet of energy called a gamma ray. Gamma rays do not have electrical charge, but they do have angular momentum. Gamma rays are usually emitted from nuclei immediately after other types of decay. Gamma rays can be used to analyze radioactive materials, to kill bacteria in food, to find some types of disease, and to treat some kinds of cancer. Gamma rays have the highest energy of any electromagnetic wave, and gamma rays bursts in space are the most energetic release of energy ever recorded, even more that supernova's.
