The Xbox 360 game console can have many problems. The problem that people think is the worst problem is what many people call the "Red Ring of Death" problem. When three red lights burn on the Xbox 360 it will not work anymore. It means that the xbox was too hot inside and is "burned" inside, and it has "died". Many people have had this problem, and other problems (like games that do not work because the Xbox 360 has put a scratch on the game disk), and many people wrote about these problems in newspapers and magazines. They say a lot of all the Xbox 360s will break and will have to be repaired or replaced by Microsoft.
When the Xbox 360 was sold for the first time Microsoft said the problems were "normal", just as many problems as with other electronic things. but Microsoft never admitted how many Xbox 360s they had to repair because of the "Red Ring of Death" problem. Luckily, Microsoft fixes Xbox 360s for free when they break down.
Microsoft will not say how many of the Xbox 360s will break, they keep it a secret.
But some of the people who sell them know how many they get back from angry people because it is broken. They have told the newspapers and magazines that they believe that of each three Xbox 360s sold one will break with the "Red Ring of Death". Others say, no, it is more like one in four of the Xbox 360's. Nobody knows exactly how many break because Microsoft keeps it a secret, but most people who sell them say the problem is very bad.
Microsoft tries to make the problem a little bit smaller by trying to change the inside of the Xbox so that it will not become so hot inside.
In July of the year 2007, Peter Moore (the man who was responsible for the Xbox 360) admitted the problem. He said that Microsoft would repair any Xbox 360 that broke and gave the "Red Ring of Death", until the Xbox 360 was three years old.
Microsoft also told people who own a little bit of Microsoft (a.k.a. Microsoft stockholders) that they needed one and a half billion dollars to pay for the broken Xbox 360s.
How to fix the Red Ring of Death.
Turn on the Xbox 360. Unplug all of your inputs and get 2 towels. Wrap the 2 towels around the 360. Make sure no heat escapes. Leave it on for 20 minutes and after 20 minutes, turn off the 360 and then turn it on again.
Another method to fix this issue is a 'preventative' measure that has revived a few consoles even with the hardware failure issue or for those that constantly freeze/crash during game session. One must simply turn on their air-conditioner and the cold air (preferably 22 'c) aimed towards the left-side of the console (vertical position). Turn on the console, wait for 10 minutes and then load a game disc. Wait another 10 minutes at the game menu and then play as usual. Continue playing with the air-conditioner turned on. The Red Ring of Death is caused by loose GPU in the console. By using cold air, the GPU remains stationary and does not emit much heat.
