Self-injury (SI) or self-harm (SH) is an injury that a person does to their own body on purpose. This kind of self-harm is not suicidal. In fact, many self-harmers hurt themselves because they feel it is the only way to stay alive. However, in some cases self-injury can become life-threatening, and those who self-harm are more likely to commit suicide than those who do not.
There are many different reasons why a person may do self-injury, though exact causes are often hard to tell. It may be to relieve unbearable emotions, or sensations of unreality or numbness. Self-harm is often a symptom of other problems. These problems may be include physical abuse, sexual abuse, or eating disorders. Also, it may stem from mental problems such as low self esteem or perfectionism.
Studying the causes of self-injury can be difficult or inaccurate, because many self-harmers try to hide their injuries.
Types of self-injury.
Self-injury is a general term that includes many different types of deliberate harm to one's body. There are many things that can be considered self-harm. Pushing oneself too hard physically, for example, can be a mild form of self-injury. In other mild cases, a self-harmer may purposely pick off scabs to keep cuts or scratches from healing. Hair-pulling (trichotillomania) is another mild form of self-harm.
In more severe cases, a self-harmer could end up breaking or spraining a bone, or cause a dangerous loss of blood. Biting, burning, and cutting are other forms of self-injury. It is also fairly common among self-harmers to overdose on medication.
Self-harm gets worse the longer a person has been doing it. This is because a person's body builds up tolerance (adjusts) to the pain from their injuries. Because of this, they have to make bigger injuries to get the same effect. In some cases, this can lead to fatal or near-fatal injuries.
Sometimes a person may go through voluntary pain for other reasons in a way that is not considered to be self-injury. Some people go through pain to change the way they look, such as in ear piercing. This is called body modification. Body modification is not a form of self-injury. A self-inflicted wound is another type of injury done to oneself. However, unlike self-injury, a self-inflicted wound is not done because of psychological problems. Some people give themselves a self-inflicted wound during wartime so that they do not have to serve in the military.
Self-injury in the population.
Experts estimate that about 1% of the population has self-harmed. While people of all ages and ethnic groups have self-harmed, some groups are more likely to self-harm than others. Age, gender, and race can be factors in the risk of self-injury. Some evidence suggests that self-injury is also more common in people who have a family history of suicide or self-injury.
Age.
In general, more young people are treated for self injury than any other age group. One in eight teens say they have self-injured. It is more widespread among those with mental illness at 1 out of 4, or 25%. For women, the ages of 15-19 are most common. Males are most common to self-harm through the ages 20-24.
Recent research focusing on young people suggests that 10 percent of 15 to 16 year olds have self-harmed. In this case, the self-harm was usually done by cutting.
Gender.
It is usually believed that women have higher rates of self-harm than men. People believe this because women are more likely get help for their self-injury. However, some findings have suggested that in the mid-30's age range, more men are treated for self-harm than women. Young white females are most likely to self-injure.
It is generally believed that women have higher rates of self-harm. However, this may not be true, because women are more likely to tell someone and get treatment for self-harm. Males may have the same or similar rates of self-injury as women. However, males are less likely to get help. This makes it difficult to know how many males self-injure.
A study in Oxford in the year 2000 found that around 300 per 100,000 (3%) males aged between 15 and 24 years, and 700 per 100,000 (7%) females of the same age, were admitted into a hospital after self-harming.
Race.
Minority groups who face discrimination are also more likely to self-injure. Bullying because of race or ethnicity can lead to low self-esteem and a feeling of helplessness over emotions. This can lead some people to self-harm.
Personal history.
Studies have show that those who have been abused are more likely to self-injure. Sexual abuse, physical abuse, and emotional abuse can cause low self-esteem, especially in children. It can also cause other emotional problems. Some people may turn to self-harm to relieve these emotions. Low self-esteem in victims of abuse may lead them to believe that the abuse was their fault. They may turn to self-injury because of this.
Unstable living conditions such as unemployment or divorce may also be risk factors.
Prisoners are also more likely to self-harm. This may be because of the ongoing trauma that happens in prisons, including sexual and physical violence and intimidation. In an environment such as prison, where options for inmates are limited, prisoners may turn to self-injury. In England and Wales, a report from The Howard League says that over 22,000 prisoners harmed themselves in 2007.
Those with learning and developmental disabilities such as autism are more likely to self-harm. The cause of this is unclear. Some case studies have shown that it may be a form of self-stimulation. It may be that autistic children who self-harm are trying to express frustration that they cannot explain with words. Autistic children who self-harm may do so by head-banging or biting.
Treatment.
Self-harm is an addictive behavior. Once someone starts self-injury, it is difficult for them to stop, even if they want to. This makes professional help and treatment an important part of recovery from self-injury.
The type of treatment that is most effective is different from person to person. There are many different types of therapy that have been used to help self-harmers.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy may help a person understand why they self-harm. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is used to help patients understand the reasons for their problem. This is so that the patient may learn what is causing their self-harm, and learn how to deal with these problems in a way other than self-harm.
Therapies used for post-traumatic stress disorder may also help. This is because many people who self-harm have been victims of abuse. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing therapy (EMDR) is an example of this.
Drugs may also be used to help treat self-injury. It is thought that self-injury can release chemical endorphins into the brain. Over time, these chemicals can become addictive. There are some drugs that can help with this addiction. Naltrexone and naloxone are two drugs being researched for this kind of treatment. However, research involving endorphins has been mostly done with retarded or autistic children. It is unclear if their unique brain chemistry changes the outcome of the research.
