The Scout movement (sometimes called Scouting) is a youth movement. It was started in 1907 as a movement for boys by Robert Baden-Powell.
Baden-Powell took many ideas from the experiences he made with the Mafeking Cadet Corps. This corps was a paramilitary group made of boys. It was formed during a siege in the Second Boer War. The boys mainly carried messages; that way the soldiers coud focus on defending the city.
Today, the scout movement is for boys and girls, aged about eight to about twenty. Originally, the movement was for boys only. A movement for girls, called "Girl Guides" was started in 1910. Today, both the movement for boys, and that for girls are part of the scout movement.
In the scout movement, people learn to work together to achieve a goal. They also train their character, to become better adults.
Usually when they start in the scouts they give a promise to live by certain rules, and to help others when they can.
Scouts spend their time outdoors, whenever possible.
How many scouts there are.
In 2005, there were more than 28 million boy scouts and over 10 million girl guides, from 216 different countries. Only in six countries was there no scout movement in 2006. They were Andorra, People's Republic of China, Cuba, Laos, Myanmar and North Korea.
In Cuba, there was a scout organisation, but the Communist government replaced it by the José Martí Pioneer Organization, which is similar to scouts, but without the international brotherhood and the peace mission. Scouting organisations have been banned in China. They have been replaced by Young Pioneers of China an Communist Youth League of China. These organisations are similar to scouts, but without the international brotherhood and the peace mission. There are no scouting organisations in Myanmar, but there are a few boy scouts and girl scouts (headed by the US scout movement) in Yangoon.
How it started.
Baden-Powell was a military officer. He was stationed in India and Africa in the 1880s and 1890s. Since his youth, he was fond of woodcraft and military scouting. He therefore showed his men how to survive in the wilderness. He noticed that if he taught the soldiers to develop independence, they would no longer follow the orders given by their officers blindly.
During the Second Boer War, Baden-Powell was besieged in the small town of Mafeking by a much larger Boer army (the Siege of Mafeking). The Mafeking Cadet Corps was a group of youths that supported the troops. The cadets carried messages. This freed the men for military duties. It also kept the boys occupied during the long siege. The Cadet Corps performed well, helping in the defence of the town (1899–1900). This experience was one of the many factors that inspired Baden-Powell to form the Scouting movement. Each member received a badge that showed a combined compass point and spearhead. The badge's logo was similar to the fleur-de-lis that Scouting later adopted as its international symbol.
In the United Kingdom the public followed his struggle to hold Mafeking through newspapers. After the siege, Baden-Powell had become a national hero. This pushed the sales of a small instruction book he had written about military scouting, "Aids to Scouting".
On his return to England he noticed the large interest of boys in this book, which was also used by teachers and youth organizations. Several people suggested to him to rewrite this book for boys, especially during an inspection of the Boys' Brigade. This brigade was a large youth movement, drilled with military precision. Baden-Powell thought this would not be attractive and suggested that it could grow much larger when scouting would be used. He studied other schemes, parts of which he used for Scouting.
Other scout-like organisations.
Since trhe scouts were formed, other people have tried to form scout-like movements. These movements are much like the scouts, but they put more weight on different things. There are for example socut-like movements that focus more on the fact that the young people should get a good education in religious matters. The movements that have been formed in countries such as Cuba or China are much like scouts; they leave out some elements tohugh, that the national governments thought would harm the country.
