A sniper is a soldier in an army who has special training with sniper rifles. Snipers are able to shoot at targets very far away, or that are very small, and hit them accurately using a sniper scope. They are also specially trained to be stealthy and hard for the enemy to see when they are hiding, by using camouflage.
Many police departments have snipers on their SWAT team. Often experienced hunters share many of the skills that snipers need to know, because the two jobs are very similar, and sniping developed from hunting "snipe" - birds that were very hard to see and shoot.
Snipers in War.
Because snipers are very good at remaining hidden from the enemy, even at close range, they are often used as scouts for the army. They use the scopes on their sniper rifles to see further than most soldiers are able to see. Because they are very well trained and usually very smart, snipers are often able to see details and remember information that ordinary soldiers would not.
Snipers usually work in teams of two, with a spotter. The spotter finds targets for the sniper, and if the sniper misses, the spotter helps him adjust his next shot so it hits. The spotter also protects the sniper from enemies at close range. The spotter also uses the radio to speak with other military units, and can call airplanes and helicopters to bomb enemies that the sniper cannot hurt. This means that ground troops don't have to worry about enemies so much, and it is safer for them to move forwards.
Snipers in World War I and II.
In World War I (WWI) there were no special sniper rifles. Instead snipers used normal rifles with a sniper scope attached.
In World War II snipers were common and were an important part of the fighting. A sniper or a 'marksman' was included in every squad in the Soviet army. Camouflage tactics were developed during this time. Snipers were very effective during the Battle of Stalingrad, where one Russian sniper supposedly killed over 240 German troops.
Accuracy.
Most soldiers get training so that they can shoot a target that is to away and hit it half of the time. Very well trained soldiers, such as the U.S. Marine Corps, can hit a target that is to away half of the time. But a sniper is trained to be able to hit a target over away almost every single time.
Some snipers are accurate enough so that they can shoot something out of a target's hand, although this is very dangerous and rare.
They have to be careful when aiming, because of the long distances they are shooting. Changes in the wind can cause their bullets to go dozens of feet off target. For this reason, snipers learn to adjust their aim to compensate. Also, because of gravity, the bullet fired by the sniper rifle will drop over time. Therefore, the sniper will have to adjust his shot higher than normal.
Typically snipers use heavy bullets that are pushed around less by the wind. These bullets also have a large amount of gunpowder behind them, which makes them go very fast. This allows them to hit a target before it moves and lessens the effect of gravity and wind. Also, larger and faster bullets do more damage when they hit a target.
Camouflage.
Snipers usually wear camouflage clothing, to avoid being seen. They often paint their faces green or black to make it shine less, and blend in with the surroundings. Also, they sometimes wear special suits, called ghillie suits, which are made of plants, and shredded burlap or yute. These suits are very effective at hiding the sniper. Often times a sniper can be invisible to an enemy standing right next to him. Snipers will often make several ghillie suits and have many different kinds of camouflage for different kinds of terrain.
A sniper's camouflage works best when it hides the outline and shape of his body. This is because the human eye can easily see that kind of shape. If the sniper's shape does not look like that of a human, most people will not be able to find him when he is blended in. Snipers generally use sticks, leaves, grass, and cloth to break up their outline. These things are attached to their ghillie suit.
Police snipers generally do not need to worry about camouflage, because their main job is to make accurate shots, not to hide from the criminal. However, sometimes they will need to hide, so police snipers are trained how to hide as well.
Sniper rifles.
A sniper uses a special kind of rifle called a sniper rifle. This rifle is much more accurate than normal rifles. Almost all sniper rifles use a scope, a special telescope that allows them to see targets very far away. There are two different kinds of sniper rifles: bolt action rifles, which fire a single shot and then the user must ready the next shot, and semi-automatic ("semi-auto") rifles which fire a single shot each time the trigger is pulled, and automatically ready the next shot for firing. Fully automatic rifles, which fire continuously when the trigger is pulled as long as there is ammunition, generally are not used though in rare instances they can be converted into a sniper rifle. In one such instance, a heavy machine gun with a scope, while not a true sniper rifle, set the record for longest kill by a sniper for years, until advances in rifle technology and sniper training allowed a sniper with a true sniper rifle to beat that record.
Typically, bolt-action rifles have a longer range and are more accurate than semi-automatic rifles, however because each round must be chambered by hand, the rate of fire is slower than a semi-automatic rifle, which fires as fast as the shooter can squeeze the trigger. At close ranges, or in situations where a shooter must make a quick follow-up shot, a sniper may prefer to use the semi-automatic rifle instead.
Sniper rifles range in caliber (the diameter, or width, of the bullet fired in fractions of an inch) from as small as with the.22 LR bullet (long rifle) fired by many small pistols, to as large as with the .50 Browning Machine Gun (BMG) bullet which is fired by vehicle mounted heavy machine guns. Smaller rounds like the.22 LR are often used at very close range with a sound suppressor (commonly called a silencer) to quickly and quietly break street lights or kill vermin and small animals. The round is generally too weak and has too short of a range for longer range work, or shots on human-sized targets. In contrast, large rounds like the.50 BMG are fired out of very large and heavy sniper rifles that are often used for destroying light vehicles and equipment. They can fire at extreme ranges of over a mile, but generally are too bulky, inaccurate at short ranges, and expensive for general purpose work.
Police snipers.
Police departments also use snipers. These snipers mainly serve on the SWAT team for their department. Often they are called upon to provide security at special events, or to make sure that other snipers do not assassinate someone. This job is called counter-sniping. Most police snipers are trained by the military.
Snipers in popular culture.
Snipers are often used in video games as elite soldiers. Getting a headshot with a sniper rifle is thought of as a hard skill to learn. In some movies, assassins use sniper rifles; examples include "Phone Booth" and "Vantage Point". Sometimes snipers have a bad reputation in the media; for example, in October 2002 two men went on a month long killing spree using a Sniper rifle in the Virginia and Maryland area.
Famous snipers.
Some snipers are famous for having killed hundreds of enemy soldiers. One such sniper is U.S. Marine Corps sniper Carlos Hathcock, who was famous in the Vietnam War for wearing a white feather in his hat. Other snipers are famous for being able to kill an enemy from very far distances away. Carlos Hathcock held the record for the longest kill for a very long time — his farthest was over. However, in the Afghanistan War, snipers from the Canadian Army broke the record with a shot of 2,657 yards, (2,430 metres, or about 1.51 miles). Other snipers are known for difficult shots. For example, Matt Hughes had to make a shot in very high winds by aiming over to the left of the enemy. An example of a famous sniper in WWII is Vasily Zaytsev. He supposedly killed 225 enemy soldiers during the Battle of Stalingrad.
