Subtropical Storm Nicole was the 15th tropical or subtropical cyclone, 14th named storm, and 1st subtropical storm of the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season. It was the first subtropical storm to be given a name from the standard hurricane name list and be considered a subtropical cyclone in real-time. The storm never made landfall as a subtropical cyclone, though its remnants affected Anticosti Island, just off of the provinces of Prince Edward Island and Quebec.
Storm history.
Nicole’s genesis appears to be associated with an upper-tropospheric trough and a decaying frontal system that were over the southwestern North Atlantic during the first week of October. By October 8, a broad area of surface low pressure became evident about 400 miles (640 km) southeast of Bermuda, and began to produce gale force winds, which affected Bermuda on October 9. Early on October 10, the National Hurricane Center determined that a low-pressure system to the west of Bermuda had acquired sufficient tropical characteristics to be named Subtropical Storm Nicole.
Nicole moved generally northeast over cooler waters and was declared fully extratropical on October 11 while 345 miles (555 km) south-southeast of Halifax, Nova Scotia. The Canadian Hurricane Centre continued to issue advisories on, as they called it, post-tropical Storm Nicole, which had merged with a stronger cyclone as the combined system dropped heavy rainfall on the Maritimes in the vicinity of Anticosti Island on October 14.
Impact.
No damage or fatalities were reported, for that Nicole never made landfall or directly affected any land areas. It brought light rain to Bermuda and briefly threatened it before heading northeast. Its remnants combined with a stronger cyclone affected Anticosti Island in Canada.
Naming and Lack of retirement.
Since Nicole never made landfall, the name Nicole was not retired by the World Meteorological Organization in spring of 2005. This is the second time a storm was named Nicole. The only other storm named Nicole was in the 1998 Atlantic hurricane season.
Records.
Since 2002, subtropical storms have been assigned names from the same naming sequence as tropical storms. Nicole was the first named subtropical storm under this rule which never achieved full tropical cyclone status. Many subtropical cyclones between 1975 and 2001 with sufficient tropical character were considered tropical storms in real-time while several were numbered. From 1972 through 1974, the phoenic alphabet was used to name subtropical cyclones.
Other websites.
For official forecasts, see the NHC's.
