"Super Ducktales" is an Ducktales's episode.
Part 1:Liquid assetats.
When the Ma Beagle's birthday is next, the Beagles sabote the new Duckburg's freeway plant to make that the freeeway pass acroos the Money Bin. After discovery it, Scrooge goes talk with the pig major but he can't accept chenge the plant. After, at Manor McDuck, Scrooge realize that he need contract a accounter.
Meanwhile, at a McDuck's factory, Fenton Crackshell decide that he need a better job. He become Scrooge's accounter but he he empties the bin and put the money in a lake near. Scrooge try protect the money with HD&L aid, but the Beagles soon found it. Using dinamite, the vallians destroy the barrage.
Part 2:Frozen assetats.
Ma Beagle become a happy woman when the money come to her house. Meanwhile, Scrooge decide made ice the lake using a gigants ventilators. Fenton and the nephews transport the frozen the money to Money Bin, now localized out of the city. Because the Bin is out the city, Scrooge is worried because now he can't see the bin of his mansion. Gyro construct a robot to protect the building but the robot don't leave Scrooge enter on the bin.
Meanwhile, Fenton lose the Number One Dime on a phone cabin, that it fall on Beagles hands. After fall to back it, Fenton goes to Gyro's house. Gyro construct a robot suit named Gizmoduck. Fenton wear it and goes to derrote the Beagles (but not before that Gyro give to it the instructions manual). Fenton as back the coin but he loses the instructions manual.
Part 3:A duck full of metal.
Gizmoduck destroy the evil robot and become a hero. That night, at Scrooge's mansion, Scrooge tell to his nephews that Gizmoduck derrot the evil robot. The boy as so impress that, at next day, they go talk with Gizmoduck. The Beagles rapt the nephews on a visit to the liberty statue.
Gizmoduck come to the place and save the guys (Gizmoduck become the new Duckburg's hero). Unfortunately, Ma Beagle found Gizmoduck's manual. Megabite (another Ma's son) construct a control remote that they use to control Gizmoduck's suit. The citizens protest out of Scrooge's mansion while Gizmoduck give the bin to Beagles.
Part 4:The Beagle's Billionaire Club.
When Scrooge goes searching by the bin, the Beagles cloaks it in a Donut's factory. Now that she as Scrooge's money, Ma Beagles go buy everthing that she ever want. One of those things was Scrooge's mansion, that he is obliged to sell for he can't pay the taxes. After buy the place, the Beagles made a party invited all citiziens except McDuck's family. Ma Beagle make over the town's control. Meanwhile, while the McDuck's family, the nephews enter on the mansion to robber some money.
After escape for Ma's hands, the boys show the notes to Scrooge that he recognizes it (I win this money ten years ago, when I buy the only Duckburg's Photo company). At next day, Scrooge and the police's chef go to the mansion to arrest Ma but the chef arrest Scrooge brigee by Ma. After fail on their plan to make Scrooge free, the nephews back to the mansion where they found the Beagles relaxing on the pool. The boys robber the control remote and escape with Gizmoduck to make Scrooge free
Part 5:Money to burn.
Realizing that Gizmoduck show to McDuck's family where the bin is, the Beagles try escape driving it on a gigant tractor. Unfortunately, the Bin fall on Duckburg's sea. Scrooge, Launchpad and Gizmoduck use a submarine of McDuck Corporation but a extraterratial spaceship robber it.
Scrooge and co following the spaceship on a rocket. They come to a small planet ruled by robots.
