Siam Paragon is the biggest department store in South East Asia.
The department store has opened on 9 December 2005.
It's located on RAMA I road Pathumwan. It covers in an area of 500000 km2.
More than 4000 cars can park in. Siam Paragon is the first place in Thailand that have 26 glasses elevators. And they pay the investment more than 15,000 million baht.
In Siam Paragon there are many main places. First is BF Oceanarium, Siam Ocean world,that have a lot of aquatic animals.Besides Siam Ocean world there is 4D theater by Panasonic. Second is GF Gourmet Paradise provides for maket and food. MF The Luxury, parc paragon is for organizing an activity. It’s between M floor and Siam center. There are many cloth brands, such as Versace,Hermes, and so much more.
World of super car, there are Ferrari,Porsche, Mercedes and more. World of technology, there are TOSHIBA, APPLE, SONY STYLE and more. And Paragon Cineplex consists of Siam Pavalai Royal Grand Theatre with more than 1200 seats, Krungsri IMAX Theatre, Enigma, Nokia Ultra Screen, Royal Paragon Hall for organizing a concert and other activities, and the last one is Siam Opera (constructing, will be open soon).
Siam Paragon is the biggest department store in South East Asia. This department store has opened on 9th December 2005. It's located on RAMA I road Pathumwan. It covers in an area of 500000 km2. More than 4000 cars can park in. Siam Paragon is the first place in Thailand that have 26 glasses elevators. And they pay the investment more than 15,000 million baht.
In Siam Paragon there are many main places. First is BF Oceanarium, Siam Ocean world that have a lot of aquatic animals. Besides Siam Ocean world there is 4D theater by Panasonic. Second is GF Gourmet Paradise provides for maket and food. MF The Luxury, parc paragon is for organizing an activity. It’s between M floor and Siam center. There are many cloth brands, such as Versace,Hermes, and so much more.World of super car, there are Ferrari,Porsche, Mercedes and more. World of technology, there are TOSHIBA, APPLE, SONY STYLE and more. And Paragon Cineplex consists of Siam Pavalai Royal Grand Theatre with more than 1200 seats, Krungsri IMAX Theatre, Enigma, Nokia Ultra Screen, Royal Paragon Hall for organizing a concert and other activities, and the last one is Siam Opera (constructing, will be open soon).
