"Spider-Man" is an American 2002 movie. It was made from the story of the Marvel Comics superhero, Spider-Man. It was the first in the Spider-Man movie series. It was written by David Koepp and directed by Sam Raimi. Tobey Maguire starred as Peter Parker / Spider-Man. Kirsten Dunst acted as the girl Peter loves, Mary Jane Watson, and Willem Dafoe played as the bad guy, Norman Osborn.
Plot.
At the start of the movie, Peter Parker, a very smart teenager, is bitten by a radioactive spider that had been mutated (changed) in a science study. This allows him to climb up walls, make spider webs come from his wrists, jump high, move fast and become very strong. Peter lives with his grandparents. His Uncle Ben teaches him that "with great power becomes great responsibility." He uses these powers to win a wrestling competition. However, he does not get paid what he thought he would get paid. A criminal steals a lot of money from the cashier and runs off. He then steals Ben's car and Ben dies. From then on, Peter becomes Spider-Man and vows to fight crime, using Ben's words to their fullest.
Meanwhile, Peter's friend Harry's father is in trouble. Norman is the CEO or head of his own company, but the executive board kicks him off. He tests a new kind of formula and becomes the Green Goblin. Normal also has a device that lets him fly around. Spider-Man and the Green Goblin begin to fight in various places. During a fire at a building, the Green Goblin uses his voice and pretends to be someone trapped. When Spider-Man goes to rescue the person, he finds the Green Goblin. During the fight, Spider-Man's arm is cut. Peter, Norman and Harry, Peter's friend Mary Jane Watson, and his grandmother then meet at Peter's apartment for Thanksgiving. Norman notices Peter's cut on his arm and realizes that Peter Parker is Spider-Man.
Norman then starts to hurt Peter. He scares Peter's grandmother so badly that she has to go to the hospital. There, Peter realizes that the Green Goblin knows that he likes Mary Jane Watson, so he calls her up, but the Green Goblin has already taken her. Spider-Man goes out to a bridge in New York. The Green Goblin has Mary Jane in one arm and a group of kids in a boat on the other hand. He wants Spider-Man to fail at doing something – to choose between the person he loves and innocent civilians. He then drops both at once. Spider-Man grabs Mary Jane first and uses his webbing to save the kids. The Green Goblin is angry and attacks Spider-Man. A bunch of New York people start to throw trash and knock the Green Goblin off balance.
The Green Goblin then grabs Peter and they start to fight inside an abandoned building. The fight is very violent and Spider-Mans tarts to bleed. Finally, after Spider-Man knocks the Green Goblin down, the Green Goblin says that he is Norman Osborn. Spider-Man is very surprised. Norman then distracts Peter and talks to him as he tries to get his flier to move and to kill Peter. Spider-Man ducks at the last second and the flier impales Norman, killing him. Norman's final words ask Peter not to tell Harry that he was the Green Goblin.
The last scene is at a cemetery for the funeral of Norman. During the ceremony, Harry tells Peter that he swears that Spider-Man will die because Spider-Man killed his father. Mary Jane implies that she loves Peter, but Peter tells her that he will always be a friend and be there for her, and that is all he can give to her.
Reception.
After the movie was kept from being made for almost 25 years, it was shown in theaters on May 3, 2002. Critics liked it a lot and it broke many movie records. It made more money than any other movie in the year 2002. As of late 2007, "Spider-Man" is the seventh highest grossing movie in the United States and 17th highest world wide. It made enough money and two sequels have been made, "Spider-Man 2" (2004) and "Spider-Man 3" (2007).
