A set is a concept from mathematics. A set is like a bag, that can hold things. A set cannot hold a certain item more than once. Either that item is in the set or it is not. Structures from mathematics, that are like sets in quite a few ways, but can hold a certain type of item more than once are called multisets (or indeed, "bags").
In the following sections, a "bag" is a "shopping bag".
Element of.
Various things can be put into a bag. Later on, a valid question would be if a certain thing is in the bag. Mathematicians call this "element of". Something is an element of a set, if that thing can be found in the respective bag.
Empty set.
Like a bag, a set can also be "empty". The empty set is like an empty bag: it has no things in it.
Comparing sets.
Two sets can be compared. This is done by looking at two different bags. If they contain the same things, they are equal.
Cardinality of a set.
When mathematicians talk about a set, they sometimes want to know how big a set is. They do this by counting how many elements are in the set (how many items are in the bag). The cardinality is a simple number. The empty set has a cardinality of 0, since there are no things in the respective bag.
A set can have an infinite number of elements. One such set is the set of natural numbers. Some sets with an infinite number of elements are bigger (have a bigger cardinality) than others. There are more real numbers than there are natural numbers, for example.
Subsets.
A set can have a large number of elements. Like a pretty full, large bag. Some of these elements perhaps have some other things in common, other than that they are all in the bag. Mathematicians call this a "subset". It can be thought of as a smaller bag, inside the bigger bag. In the shopping bag, there might be a bag of vegetables and a bag containing meat. Those two sets would then be subsets of the bigger set.
Combining sets.
There are different ways to combine sets.
Unions.
The Union of two sets is a set that contains all the elements of both sets. It is like taking several shopping bags, and putting all things from them into a bigger bag.
Intersections.
The intersections of two sets is a set that contains all the elements that are in both sets. If two people went shopping independently, the intersection is all the things that both of them bought: if one bought apples, carrots, and potatoes and the other bought apples, carrots and sausage, the intersection would be apples and carrots.
Complements.
The complement is like the difference of two sets. It's like saying I want all things that are in the first bag, but not in the second bag. Taking the example from above, this would be potatoes.
Special sets.
Some sets are very important to mathematics. They are used very often. One of these is the "empty set".
Each of these sets of numbers has an infinite number of elements, and formula_16. The primes are used less frequently than the others outside of number theory and related fields.
The barber paradox.
There is a small town somewhere. In that town, there is a barber. All the men in the town do not like beards, so they either shave themselves, or they go to the barber shop to be shaved by the barber.
We can therefore make a statement about the barber himself: "The barber shaves all men that do not shave themselves. He only shaves those men (since the others shave themselves and do not need a barber to give them a shave)."
This of course raises the question: What does the barber do each morning to look clean-shaven? This is the paradox.
