Emin Pariz Saidoff (1988 Moscow) and Christina Princess Saidoff (1986 Moscow) are Dutch celebrities, party animals, models, singers, actors and television personalities. And they are a descendants of a rich Russian Aristocratic family Ter Hachatrjan.
As Models.
They began modeling when they were childeren. At 9 and 11, they signed with ‘Детское Модельное бюрo‘ modeling agency. Emin Pariz and Christina Princess had worked with modeling agencies such as Fashion Week Moscow in Moscow city and Men’s underwear in Europe.
As actors.
As an actors, they had appeared in several minor roles, most notably in the Dutch movie ‘112 De Film’ (2007), ‘I wish’ (2008) and Italian theater drama Hey Girl! of Italian director Romeo Castellucci.
They had appeared in numerous advertising campaigns, including ‘Puschkin’ vodka, Stella Consuella and EPS Aristocratic.
In July 2008, they had a guest role in a new Dutch movie Spion van Oranje. The movie is about a fashion designer Francois van Vliet & Bruno van Lippe with Paul de Leeuw in the leading role.
The movie expected to be out in cinema in February 2009.
Television.
Emin Pariz and Christina Princess were judges on talent searching NCRV television show Bijna Beroemd (Almost Famous), during six episodes.
Appeared as a guests on the Dutch reality TV show ‘de Gouden Kooi’ (The Golden Cage). RTL Group 5 reality TV show started in october 2006 and Emin Pariz and Christina Princess joint the show at 12 February 2008. After staying a week in the 2 million capital villa in Eemnes, Christina Princess were voted out of the show, by millionaire Jaap. Her brother, Emin Pariz decided to leave the show with Christina Princess after lots of fights with other millionaires.
In February was reported that Saidoff’s will star in their own reality show. The title and the release of the show is still unknown.
Personal life.
Christina Princess was engaged to drummer Itzhak Bishburg from rock band Bedlight for Blue Eyes, early 2007 till may 2007. After their break up, the rumor went about Christina’s pregnancy.
In 2006 has been a bad year for Emin Pariz. He was hospitalized because of having anorexia. The rumors about Emin Pariz being anorexic are still follow him till these days.
