Sánchez Ramírez is a province of the Dominican Republic. It is located in the central part of the country. Its capital city is Cotuí.
It was created on 1952. It was a municipality of the Duarte province before being elevated to the category of province.
Location.
The Sánchez Ramírez province is in the centre of the country, in the southeast limit of the Cibao Valley (part of the region called "Eastern Cibao"). It is bordered to the north by the Duarte province, to the east and south by the Monte Plata province, to the southwest by the Monseñor Nouel and La Vega provinces.
Origin of name.
The province was named after Juan Sánchez Ramírez, who was born in Cotuí and who fought against the French army when the country was a colony of France. When the country was again a Spanish colony, Sánchez Ramírez was the governor of the colony.
History.
The territory of the province was part of the La Vega Province from the Dominican independence (in 1844) until 1945 when most of the territory was made part of the Duarte Province.
On 3 March 1952, the province was created with the territory of Cotuí, part at that moment of the Duarte Province, and the southeastern part of La Vega Province. When it was created, it had only two municipalities: Cotuí, the provincial capital, and Cevicos.
Municipalities.
The Sánchez Ramírez province has a total area of 1,196.13 km². It has 2.5% of the area of the Dominican Republic and it is ranked as the 21st (out of 31 plus the National District) largest province.
There are four municipalities and eight municipal districts in the province.
Population.
In 2002 (last national census), there were 151,179 people living in the Sánchez Ramírez province, and 69,218 (45.8%) living in towns and cities. The population density was 126.4 persons/km².
Geography.
There are two regions in the country. The valley of the River Yuna on the north and the northeast of the province, and the Sierra de Yamasá in the southern part of the province.
The valley of the River Yuna is part of the large region of Eastern Cibao; it is flat and with very good soils.
The Sierra de Yamasá is the eastern mountain range of the Cordillera Central ("Central mountain chain") with low mountains. The highest mountain in the province is in this mountain range; it is "La Naviza" (sometimes written La Navisa) and it is 680 metres high.
The most important river is the Yuna, that flows from west to east; the other rivers are all tributaries of this river. Other rivers are Cevicos, Chacuey and Maguaca; they flow from the Sierra de Yamasá into the River Yuna.
Economy.
The main economic activities in the province are farming and mine. Close to the town of Las Lagunas, in the Sierra de Yamasá, are the gold mines.
The main products of farming in the Sierra de Yamasá are cacao, orange and tobacco. In the Yuna valley, rice is the most important product but pineapple and orange are also produced.
Cattle is also important in the province, mainly in the northwestern part of it.
