Slavery (also called thralldom) is a system where people, called slaves, must work with little or no pay for their work. Slaves do not have rights and have no choice but to work.
Slavery is a form of unfree labour and, in general, slaves are owned by someone else. If a slave is owned by someone else, he is called a chattel slave (pronounced. Chattel slaves are property, much like cattle. They are bought and sold in the same way.
Slavery today.
People are still being made slaves in some parts of the world. The ways in which it is done have changed. Today, slaves work because of things like a high debt (for example, slaves have to work to pay off a debt). For girls and women, forced prostitution is a type of slavery. Another form of slavery still happening today is forced child labor. Some children have to work in mines or in plantations, or they have to fight wars as child soldiers, for no pay.
One study says that there are 27 million people (but others say there could be as many as 200 million) in slavery today, everywhere.
Countries.
There is obvious enslavement still taking place in parts of Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia. In Summer 2007, 570 people were found to be slaves for brick makers in China. Of those freed, 69 of them were children. The Chinese government made a force of 35,000 police check northern Chinese brick kilns for slaves, and sent lots of kiln supervisors and officials to prison and sentenced one kiln foreman to death for killing an enslaved worker.
In Mauritania, it is estimated that up to 600,000 men, women and children, or 20% of the population, are enslaved, many of them used as bonded labour. Slavery in Mauritania was made illegal in August 2007. In Niger, slavery is also rife. A Nigerian study has found that more than 800,000 people are enslaved, almost 8% of the population. Child slavery has commonly been used when making cash crops and mining. According to the U.S. Department of State, more than 109,000 children were working on cocoa farms alone in Côte d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast) in 'the worst forms of child labour' in 2002.
Slave policy.
The prices for a slave are different in different places. They start at about US$40, in Mali, for young adult male workers. A young woman or a girl who does not have HIV may sell for as much as US$1,000 in Thailand. In 1850 in the United States, a slave could have been US$1,000 — about $25,800 today. The change in price is probably due to the fact of today's greater population, making human life cheaper. As a result of the lower price, the money advantages of present-day slavery are clear.
In November 2006, the International Labour Organisation said that it would prosecute members of the junta that rules Myanmar (also called Burma) at the International Court of Justice for "Crimes against Humanity". This is because the military obliges some citizens to forced labour. The International Labour Organisation says that it thinks that about 800.000 people are forced to work this way.
Stopping slavery.
Slavery was a very normal thing more than 150 years ago, but now most people know it is wrong, and most countries do not allow it.
In 1833 Britain stopped slavery, then in 1865 the United States did the same. They made it a crime to own slaves. In the United States, it stopped after the American Civil War. When the North won, all slaves were made free. When that happened, it was called "abolition of slavery". Slavery still exists today in some countries.
