Sleeping Beauty is a classic fairy tale. An early variant by the Italian was published in 1634, but the most famous version was first written by Charles Perrault under the title of "La Belle au bois dormant" ("The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood"). This story was later retold by the Brothers Grimm under the title of "Dornröschen" ("Little Briar-Rose").
Part One.
A king and a queen have a baby girl. They invite fairies to her christening. Unfortunately, they forget to invite an old fairy and so the old fairy places a curse on the princess. She says that she will one day prick her finger on the spindle of a spinning wheel and will die. Fortunately, one of the good fairies changes the curse so that instead, the princess shall sleep for a hundred years and be discovered by the prince of her dreams. The king also bans spinning wheels, but none the less, his daughter finds a spinning wheel when she is sixteen and falls into the deep sleep. The good fairy also puts everyone in the castle to sleep and covers the castle with a thorny forest. A hundred years later, a prince discovers the castle and the princess. He kisses the sleeping princess, and she wakes up. They fall in love and get married and have babies.
Part Two.
Most versions of the story that are told today end when the princess wakes up, but Perrault writes about something scary that happened to the princess and her new children. The prince goes off to fight in a war and his wife and children stay with his mother, who is an ogress. The queen wants to eat the princess and her two children but her servants helps save the two children. He gives the ogress some normal meat and tells her that they are the princess and her children. The ogress believes this but she finds out that she has been tricked. She plans to push her daughter-in-law and grandchildren into a pit of nasty snakes. But the prince arrives just in time and the queen does not kill his wife and children. She throws herself into the pit instead and dies.
Ballet.
A Russian ballet with music by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky was first performed in 1890. The music for the ballet has become very famous. At the end of the ballet, characters from other fairy tales by Charles Perrault attend the wedding of the prince and princess.
Disney's film.
In 1959, Walt Disney made an animated film based on the fairy tale. The film and the original story have differences. In this version, the princess is called Aurora, the prince is called Philip and the evil fairy is called Maleficant. The princess only sleeps for a little while before she is kissed by the prince and the pair meet in the forest beforehand. The good fairies (whose names are Flora, Fauna and Merryweather) also provide comic moments throughout the film. The music from Tchaikovsky's ballet is used in the film.
