Super Smash Bros. Brawl is a new game by Nintendo. It came out in 2008. It is just like the other Super Smash Bros. games. It was released on to the Wii Console.
Dojo.
This is the third Super Smash Bros. game. It was released in Japan on January 31, 2008 and in North America on March 9, 2008. It has been released on June 27, 2008 in Europe and in Australia on June 26, 2008. It consists of many characters who have taken part in the previous games, such as Mario, Link, Fox, Kirby, and Pikachu. The new characters in this game are Wario, Meta Knight, Pit, Zero Suit Samus, Olimar, Lucas, Diddy Kong, Pokémon Trainer, King Dedede, Lucario, Ike, R.O.B., Toon Link, Wolf, Snake and Sonic. Masahiro Sakurai has a blog which shows new information that was released every weekday up until the release of Brawl in the U.S. It has now become a detailed guide for the game. The website is called Smash Bros. DOJO!!.
Characters.
In Super Smash Bros. Brawl, there are 35 characters. Pichu, Young Link, Roy, Mewtwo and Dr. Mario didn't appear in Brawl. Roy, Mewtwo, Dr. Mario, Dixie Kong, Toon Zelda and Toon Sheik were about to be in Brawl but were removed. There is a rumor that Plusle and Minun were about to be in Brawl but nothing has been officialy said about that.
Continuity.
Returning from Melee are the standard attacks where a player can utilize various moves of different damage effectiveness. A standard attack can be done without pushing in any direction, strong attacks can be done by holding the analogue stick (D-Pad for wii remote) in a direction of choice while pressing the standard attack buttion, and a smash attack can be done by tilting the control stick (pressing D-pad direction on Wii remote) at the same time whilst pressing or even holding the standard attack button. For the wii remote, one can either press 1 and 2 at the same time to do a very strong attack, or can press 2 at the same time with any D-Pad direction to do up to 3 strong attacks. Moves can also be done in the air by pressing the attack or A button (2 for wii remote) and any direction. Special moves are performed with the "Special Move" button and each character has 4 special attacks he/she can use. Pressing the Special Move button with any direction or even none at all will create such an attack.
New moves.
Newly introduced to Brawl are powerful special moves of specific characters called 'Final Smashes'. These massive attacks can only be used once a player obtains the 'Smash Ball' that floats around the stage by attacking it until the character 'possesses' its power. The 'special move' button on any of the 4 controls available for Brawl will unleash the 'Final Smash'. Players can also perform 3 taunts instead of just the one from the last two Super Smash Bros games by choosing to press the "taunt button" in different directions on the D-pad, except for the Wii remote by itself which is just pressing the A button, along with a D-Pad direction.
Gameplay.
Brawl consists of many game modes such as Classic Mode in which a fighter must defeat every character given for each stage.
In addition, there is an all-new "beat-em up" adventure mode, The Subspace Emissary in which characters go on a journey to defeat the Subspace Army and prevent them from contaminating the SMASH universe. Each character will go by their own storyline and history, and during the entire adventure, the player is able to choose between different characters at different periods, and is usually able to pick between two characters: one to be the main protagonist, the other an assistant.
One can select any level of difficulty from very easy to very hard, which can vary the number of enemies that roam the levels, or the level of skill of the more challenging enemies whom require more damage to be knocked out.
The new mode will allow two players to play together, sometimes resulting in a "clone" version of a character to be playable on some stages, or allowing the other player to play a character that the other player isn't using for that stage.
If a level is beaten, it is possible to return to that stage and play as a character that one wishes to use; however it will lack the grand CG (Computer Graphics) cutscene before one plays the level! If one completes the Adventure mode once, he/she may choose to select an option called "Boss Battles" and replay a boss that was included in the Adventure mode.
The unlockable All-Star Mode is where one chooses a character to battle against all other characters once they are all unlocked. Only three "Health Hearts" are available to heal damage as one plays, since the amount of damage the player takes carries over to the next battles, making it a challenge to complete it without dying.
New features.
Brawl has Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection in which people can send to other Wii users and visa-versa recorded matches or they can even 'Spectate' the matches and bet on some 'Brawl' coins (obtainable from Classic Mode) for who they believe will win the match. One can also play matches online by simply connecting via wi-fi connection and the internet, in which he/she will have a chance to play against strangers or other wii users. Another nice feature is the ability to play demos of past nintendo games from NES, SNES and N64 in a game option called "Masterpieces", usually in a time limit.
New challenges.
Returning to Brawl from previous Smash Bros titles is Stadium Mode in which there is a Target Smash challenge (known as 'Break the Targets' in Super Smash Bros 64 and 'Target Test' in Super Smash Bros Melee) and the Home Run Contest introduced from Melee.
In Brawl, players can now select a character to take part in various levels of difficulty in Target Smash such that there will be 5 different courses to choose from for all characters.
In Brawl, the Home-Run Contest will allow co-operative play in which two players can help each other in building damage on the sandbag in order to whack it as far as possible! One can also choose to have a barrier to surround the platform so that the character does not fall then becomes disqualified from the contest.
Brawl also brings back Multi-Man Melee, now known as Multi-Man Brawl! Differing from the previous Super Smash Bros games, players can now battle against hoards of enemies known as Alloys; they appear in 4 colors: red, blue, yellow and green, each with different abilities! One can still select from 10 Man Brawl, 100 Man Brawl, 3 Minute Brawl, 15 Minute Brawl, Endless Brawl, or even the infamous Cruel Brawl (much tougher version of Endless Brawl).
A hidden challenge known as "Boss Battles" can be unlocked once the player beats the adventure mode at least once! Here, the player can beat bosses again, which appear in RANDOM order, except for Tabuu, who is always the last boss. Like All-Star Mode, only three heart containers are available to fix up your health when not battling.
Stages.
At the start, Brawl has 29 stages (23 Brawl stages and 6 Melee stages), whilst there are 12 stages that can be unlocked (8 Brawl stages and 4 Melee stages). This totals up to 41 stages overall. Thus, no stages from Super Smash Bros 64 return at all.
Demo of the game.
Demos of Super Smash Bros. Brawl were playable at the E for ALL Expo presentation in Los Angeles from October 18-22, 2007 with many positive reviews. 14 characters and 11 stages were available for the demo with only a 2 minute Time limit option. Another 2 demo battles were also shown from the Smash Bros Dojo website (from the Japanese version and the English version), which were played via Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection. The full version comprises of more styles of play such as time and stock mode, along with Special Brawl, in which players can change the characters in size and look, change the gameplay, fight with more characters, fight in more stages, and play in more modes.
Unique Game Aspects.
Super Smash Bros Brawl is one of the few fighting games that does not force players to face each other the entire time when fighting. You can choose to move around the stage freely, and can attack the opponent whenever you want.
Brawl is also the first Wii game to be made on a dual-layer disc, with one disc side for DVD format, and the other side for CD format. The dual-layer disc initially caused problems for some wii owners who had the first Wii models that are unable to read such discs. As a compromise, Nintendo offered people with this problem to fix up the Wiis for free or to send them new ones that could read the dual-layer discs. Because Brawl was made on a dual-layer disc, it acts differently in the Wii machine, and sometimes has problems with consistant reading.
Brawl has perhaps the largest music collection of any media in the world. It has over 300 pieces of music.
