Super Mario Bros. is a video game made by Nintendo in 1985. It is played on the Nintendo Entertainment System console.
Super Mario Bros. was a very important game because it changed how games were made later. It turned Mario into an icon. It was fun, colorful, and very big compared to other games at the time. It was very popular. In fact, The Guinness Book of World Records says that Super Mario Bros. is the best-selling video game ever.
Players of the game control Mario. To this day, Mario is one of the world's most famous fictional characters. Hundreds of Nintendo games feature Mario as the main character.
Plot.
Bowser has kidnapped Princess Toadstool. Mario must follow Bowser across eight worlds in the Mushroom Kingdom to rescue Toadstool.
Gameplay.
"Super Mario Bros." is a platform game. Mario jumps, runs, and walks across each level. The worlds are full of enemies and platforms, and open holes. If Mario touches an enemy, he dies. If he falls down a hole or misses a jump, he will also lose a life.
Mario has several "power ups." A Mushroom will make him big so if he touches an enemy he simply gets smaller; he will not die. If Mario is big and he hits a question block that has a power-up, a fire flower will come out. The fire flower will give him the power to throw fire balls, which can kill enemies. If he gets hit as Fire Mario, he will go back to being small Mario.
Each world is divided into four levels. Some levels are underground and others are underwater. When Mario is underwater, he cannot jump on any enemy and he will shrink or die if he touches one.
The fourth level is a castle. Mario faces lava, fire bars, and other enemies in this level. At the end of the level is a Bowser, who stands over a lava pit. Mario can throw fireballs to defeat Bowser. He can also jump to behind Bowser to touch an axe. Touching it will destroy the bridge and cause Bowser to fall into the lava, killing him. Toadstool's servant, Toad, will then tell Mario that the princess is in another castle. The eighth boss is the real Bowser.
Impact.
"Super Mario Bros." was both the launch game and the killer game for the Nintendo Entertainment System. This game and "Duck Hunt" was bundled with every NES sold and the game sold 40 million units as a result.
