Shaka (sometimes spelled Tshaka, Tchaka or Chaka; ca. 1787 – ca. 22 September 1828) was the most important leader of the Zulu Empire. He joined the Zulu tribal groups together into the beginnings of a nation. This Zulu nation ruled over a large area of southern Africa, between the Phongolo and Mzimkhulu rivers. His leadership and his energy make him one of the greatest Zulu chieftains. He has been called a military genius for his changes and new ideas. He has also been called a bad leader because of the brutal and cruel things that happened when he was in charge.
Historians argue about Shaka's place in Zulu history. Was he a good leader for joining the groups together or was he a bad leader who took over and destroyed the traditional Zulu ruling systems? Was he a good leader for building a single Zulu nation, or was he a bad leader who destroyed the local cultures and the previous systems built by earlier leaders like Dingiswayo. Research still goes on into the character, methods and influence of this Zulu king, whose actions are still important in southern Africa today.
Early life.
Shaka Zulu was born in about 1787. His father was a minor Zulu chief. He lived with his mother in the court of the Zulu leader of the day. He grew up to become a great military leader. When the Zulu leader was murdered by a rival clan, Shaka took over the throne.
The crushing of the people.
During this time Shaka reorganized the Zulu into a military clan. He soon made them into a force unchallenged in Southern African kingdoms. He introduced the shorter 'stabbing' spear, the 'iklwa', that replaced the traditional long and awkward 'throwing' spear. On the battlefield, he developed the now-famous "horns of the bull" formation (a two-pronged attack). Conquering tribe after tribe, he joined all his conquests together into one Zulu nation, making it grow with people and power. This also caused the displacement of thousands of people. His actions were partly responsible for spreading the Southern African tribes as far away as Mozambique.
This event was named the "Mfecane" - 'the crushing of people' by the "Nguni" people. The Sotho and Tswana called it the "Difaqane" - 'the scattering of tribes'. The Afrikaners and the British called it "the Wars of Calamity". By 1825, two and half million starving, homeless people wandered about southern Africa looking for food and shelter.
There were other things that led to the Mfecane. Corn (maize), brought in from America, grew easily in the mild seasons of southern Africa. Because the farmers were not careful, the corn used all the nutrients in the soil. As the local population increased, they needed more land to grow corn and to graze livestock. Starting in 1800, a long drought then made southern Africa unlivable. People moved in search of food, and fought for what little food could be found. The Mfengu called the drought, "madlatule" - 'eat what you can and say nothing'.
Zulu leader.
Shaka maintained a good relationship with the Europeans in Africa, including the Colonial authorities. He was disliked by other Africans, including his own people, who suffered under his long, cruel and debilitating rule of constant war.
Ten years of continual warfare placed incredible strains on the Zulu nation. Shaka, always mentally unstable and obsessively worried about being replaced by an heir, finally snapped into madness after the death of his mother in 1828. He imposed a year of celibacy (no sex) on his people. He executed anyone who did not show enough sadness at the death of his mother. He was murdered within the year by his half-brother, Dingane, who succeeded him as ruler.
Even though he created brutal conditions for his subjects, he created the powerful Zulu Kingdom and consolidated a nation and its pride.
