The Spanish-American War was a war fought between Spain and the United States of America in the year 1898. This war was fought in part because a lot of people wanted Cuba to become independent, and also because many Americans wanted their country to get a colonial empire. Spain lost the war and had to give up its colonies of Cuba, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam. All of these colonies, except for Cuba, would become U.S. colonies at the end of the war.
Causes.
Following reports of Spanish abuse and killing of Cubans, the United States sent warships to Cuba. Spain was losing control of Cuba and had been putting Cubans into concentration camps. The United States sent ships to Cuba to try to force Spain to give up Cuba. The U.S. battleship "Maine" exploded in Cuban waters, killing about 260 people on board. U.S. newspapers blamed Spain for the explosion, though it probably was caused by an accident. Spain tried to avoid going to war, but pressure from U.S. newspapers, called "yellow journalism," and ordinary people, persuaded U.S. government to go to war. Some of these people just wanted Cuba to become independent, but others hoped that the United States could build a colonial empire overseas, like many European countries had done.
Fighting.
Volunteers throughout the country signed up to go to war. Future president, Theodore Roosevelt raised troops and became famous in leading the Rough Riders during the Battle of San Juan Hill.
A major attack occurred in the Philippines. An American fleet commanded by George Dewey destroyed the Spanish fleet.
Ground battles took place in Cuba and Puerto Rico.
The war was won by the United States and they soon began to occupy and take control of these colonies after Spain surrendered. Just 250 American soldiers died during fighting, but more than 5,000 Americans died from diseases such as yellow fever, typhoid, and malaria.
Peace.
The war ended in December 1898 with the Treaty of Paris. Spain agreed to grant Cuba its freedom and gave the United States Puerto Rico and Guam. For $20 million, Spain also gave the U.S. the Philippines. Spain, which used to have a huge empire, now had only a few small colonies left in Africa. Meanwhile the United States gained land outside of North America for the first time, and started to be thought of as a world power.
