Sherlock Holmes is a character from books written by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Many of the stories were made into movies and television dramas. He is a detective (He tries to find out who committed a crime). He is famous for his detective skills and for solving mysteries. There is a monument in London dedicated to him. He has a sharp mind and is able to solve even the most difficult and unusual cases. He works with his companion Dr Watson, a retired army officer. Holmes plays the violin and smokes a pipe. Sometimes when he hasn't got any cases to solve, he uses drugs.He is very smart.He first appeared in 1887 and is known for his detective skills. People sometimes get surprised because he takes cocaine and morphine.He was the best detective in the world and it will always stay that way.He wore a hat because he was balding. Many people liked him.Sherlock Holmes was by all accounts born on 6th January 1854, and for more than a century his name has been known in every country of the world; and not only his name, but his appearance too. The hawk-like features and piercing eyes; the dressing-gown and pipe; the deerstalker cap and magnifying glass - these details are so familiar that if he were to appear amongst us today we should know him at once.
He is still however an enigmatic figure, as wrapped in mystery as the crimes he tried to solve, and as in most legends, it is often difficult to separate fact from fiction
The Science of Deduction.
In the story "The Sign of Four", the first chapter is titled "The Science of Deduction". Dr. Watson admires Sherlock Holmes attention to detail and Holmes explains the importance of apparently unimportant details.
In the second chapter of the story "A Study in Scarlet",
Sherlock Holmes Method is explained in detail. He is the only Consultant Detective in the world and his Science of Detection is based on Analysis and Deduction.
Sherlock Holmes is ignorant of literature, philosophy, astronomy and politics but his knowledge of chemistry is profound and he seems to know every detail of every horror ever committed by a criminal mind.
Sherlock Holmes' Brother.
Mycroft Holmes is Sherlock Holmes' brother. He works in the government and according to Sherlock, his brother Mycroft's powers of deduction are even better than his own so that again and again Mycroft's word has decided national policy. Sometimes, Sherlock goes to his brother to ask for advice on some little problem. In Sherlock's own words, Mycroft is the British government.
Sherlock Holmes' archenemy.
Professor James Moriarty is Sherlock Holmes' archenemy (chief enemy). He is the Napoleon of crime. He is a mathematical genius and occupied the mathematical chair (office) of a small English university but he resigned and moved to London where he became the center of organized English crime and the object of Sherlock Holmes' investigative power who cosidered the professor his intellectual equal. Sherlock Holmes vs (against) Moriarty represents one of the greatest battles of wits (shrewdness)(intelligence) in the history of the world. Holmes spoke often of Moriarty's genius in admiration notwithstanding (in spite of)(not considering) the horror of the crimes. He spoke well of Moriarty without taking into consideration the evil side of his nature.
The women in his life.
His landlady Mrs. Hudson who was genuinely fond of him (she liked him).
Mary Morstan who married Dr. Watson in 1888.
He showed his attentiveness to Violet Hunter. (He was courteous and considerate).(He showed good manners).
He posed as a plumber in his wooing (seeking the affection or love) of Charles Augustus Milverton's housemaid.
He was never really involved emotionally with a woman. In his own words, "...I have never loved."
In "A Scandal in Bohemia", the only case in which he fails, appears the only woman he considered his equal intellectually and the only woman who ever defeated him. Her name is Irene Adler. She was born in New Jersey and was an opera singer. She had a love affair (romance) with the king of Bohemia.
