The Seventh-day Adventist Church is a regular Protestant Christian denomination or church, but it has some beliefs that are different from most Protestant denominations. The Seventh-day Adventist Church is also called the SDA church. It came from the Millerite group which included people from many denominations. The Millerites started in the 19th century, after the year 1800. The Millerites were people who followed the teachings of William Miller. Miller preached that Jesus is coming very soon, in the Second Coming or Second Advent. That is why the church that came from them called themselves "Adventists." The SDA Church also believe that the day we should worship God is Saturday. They call this day Sabbath, like the Bible does. It is the seventh day of the week. That is why they are called "Seventh-day Adventists".
The Seventh Day Adventists also hold in high regard many of Ellen G. White's writings, a dedicated Christian who got visions from God interpreting the end of the world and what heaven will be like. As Seventh-Day Adventists, they believe that they should not eat unclean foods like pig, certain fish, and animals that the bible names as unclean. They practice healthy eating, vegetarianism, abstaining from immoralities, smoking, drinking or doing anything to harm what they consider the Temple Of God or their bodies.
The Seventh-day Adventist (abbreviated "Adventist") Church is a Protestant Christian group. It is different form other groups mainly because its followers think that Saturday, the original seventh day of the Judeo-Christian week, should be the Sabbath. The movement grew out of the Millerite movement in the United States during the middle part of the 19th century and was formally established in 1863. Among its founders was Ellen G. White. She wrote many texts that are still considered very important to the church today.
Much of the theology of the Seventh-day Adventist church is the same as evangelical teachings such as the Trinity and the infallibility of Scripture. Teachings that are different include the unconscious state of the dead and the doctrine of an investigative judgment. The church is also known beceause it thinks a healthy diet is very important. It also promotes religious liberty. When it comes to culture, it is more conservative.
The world church is governed by a General Conference. Smaller regions are administered by divisions, union conferences and local conferences. It currently has a worldwide membership of over 15 million people. It is present in over 200 countries and territories and is ethnically and culturally diverse. The church runs many schools, hospitals and publishing houses worldwide, as well as a prominent humanitarian aid organization known as the Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA).
There are about 15.5 million people in the Seventh-day adventist church worldwide.
