Special relativity (or the special theory of relativity) was developed and published by Einstein in 1905 because he was unhappy with the explanations of electromagnetism in classical physics. Einstein thought these explanations did not agree with the principle of relativity.
Basics of special relativity.
Before Einstein, scientists were trying to measure the speed of the Earth through the fabric of space itself. They were trying to do this by measuring the speed of starlight reaching the Earth. If the Earth was moving toward a star, the starlight from it should have been reaching the Earth a little faster than normal. If the Earth was moving away from a star, the starlight from it should reach the Earth at a slightly slower speed.
No matter who performed the experiments, or where they performed them at, or what stars they looked at, no one could measure any change in the speed of light reaching the Earth from the stars. It seemed as though the Earth was not moving at all through space ever -- even as it revolved around the Sun.
Einstein figured that this was because something was wrong with our understanding of distance and time. He reckoned that as the Earth moved through space, our clocks slowed down (ever so slightly). This way, any clock used to measure the speed of light was off. Not only was it off, but it was off by exactly the right amount to make the speed of light seem to be moving at its regular speed. Einstein also reckoned that not only did the clocks slow down, but also our measuring devices shrank (ever so slightly)-- by exactly the right amount to make the starlight reaching the Earth seem to be moving at its regular speed.
Although Einstein's idea was rejected and misunderstood at the time, it is now universally accepted as the explanation for why the speed of light never seems to change.
The Lorentz transformations.
The mathematical core of special relativity is the Lorentz Transformations, which relates the views of space and time for two comoving inertial observers. To understand them, let there be an observer "K " who describes when events occur with a temporal coordinate "t", and who describes where events occur with spatial coordinates "x", "y", and "z". To be more explicit, let us specify that the time of an event is given by the time that it is observed minus that distance to the event divided by "c". Now with this understanding in place, let there be another observer "K' "who is
Mass, energy and momentum.
In special relativity, the momentum "p" and the energy "E" of an object as a function its rest mass "m"0 are
These equations can be rewritten to use a "relativistic mass" (in the direction of motion) of formula_7. In this case, one finds that momentum is still described by "p" = "mv", while energy is described by the famous equation "E" = "mc"2.
In special relativity, energy and momentum are related by the equation
For a massless particle (such as a photon of light), formula_9 and this equation becomes "E" = "pc".
History.
The need for special relativity arose from Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism, which were published in 1865. It was later found that they call for electromagnetic waves (such as light) to move at a constant speed (i.e., the speed of light).
To have Maxwell's Equations be consistent with both astronomical observationsa> and Newtonian physicsa>, Maxwell proposed in 1877 that light travels through a luminferous ether which permeates the universe.
In 1887, the famous Michelson-Morley experiment tried to detect the "ether wind" generated by the movement of the Eartha>. The persistent null results of this experiment puzzled physicists, and called the ether theory into question.
In 1895, Lorentz and Fitzgerald noted that the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment could be explained by the ether wind contracting the experiment in the direction of motion of the ether. This effect is called the Lorentz contraction, and (without ether) is a consequence of special relativity.
In 1899, Lorentz first published the Lorentz Equations. Although this was not the first time they had been published, this was the first time that they were used as an exaplantion of the Michelson-Morley experiment's null result, since the Lorentz contraction is a result of them.
In 1900, Poincare gave a famous speech in which he considered the posibility that some "new physics" was needed to explain the Michelson-Morley experiment.
In 1904, Lorentz showed that electrical and magnetic fields can be modified into each other through the Lorentz transformations.
In 1905, Einstein published his article introducing special relativity, "On the Eletrodynamics of Moving Bodies", in Annalen der Physik. In this article, he presented the postulates of relativity, derived the Lorentz transformations from them, and (unaware of Lorentz's 1904 article) also showed how the Lorentz Transformations affect electric and magnetic fields.
Later in 1905, Einstein published another article presenting "E" = "mc"2.
In 1908, Max Plank endorsed Einstein's theory and named it "relativity". In that same year, Minkowski gave a famous speech on "Space and Time" in which he showed that relativity is self-consistent and further developed the theory. These events forced the physics community to take relativity seriously. Relativity came to be more and more accepted after that.
In 1912 Einstein and Lorentz were nominated for the Nobel prize in physics due to their pioneering work on relativity. Unfortunately, relativity remained so controversial then, and for a long time after that, that a Nobel prize was never awarded for it.
