"Symphony No. 7 in C Major "Leningrad", Op. 60" is a famous symphony by Dmitri Shostakovich. It was composed in 1941. It is a very long work, lasting about 75 minutes. The symphony was first performed by the Bolshoi Theatre Orchestra on 5 March 1942.
History of its composition.
Shostakovich gave the symphony its title because it is about what was happening in Leningrad in 1941. It was during the World War II and the German army had invaded the Soviet Union and blocked communication between the town of Leningrad (now called St Petersburg) and the rest of the world. Conditions were terrible, the people hardly had any food to eat and they were very cold in the winter. About a million people died during the siege.
Shostakovich lived in terror most of his life because of Stalin, the Soviet dictator, did not like his music he could have been put to death. But the Soviet Union also needed heroes, and sometimes Shostakovich was made a hero and sometimes he was severely criticized. His 7th symphony soon became very popular because people felt that the music was about the strength of the Soviet people and how they would be able to resist the German invasion and win the war. After the war it became less popular in the West because of the political situation. People thought that the music was just Soviet propaganda, written to show how strong Stalin was. In more recent years people have once more changed their minds about the meaning of the music. The music is now thought to show how cruel Stalin was as well as the terror of the Nazi invasion.
This all shows how impossible it is to give music a precise meaning. It is not easy to be sure about what Shostakovich was thinking when he wrote it because we are not sure exactly which year he started to compose the symphony. The fact is that it is very dramatic and exciting, and is saying something about the cruelty of human beings towards one another.
After the first performance on 5 March 1942 in Kuybïshev (now called Samara) it was soon performed in Moscow and then in Leningrad which was still blockaded at the time. A copy of the music was smuggled out to the West on microfilm. It was performed by Sir Henry Wood in London at the BBC studios on 22 June and the following week at a Promenade Concert. On 19 July it was played in New York by the NBC Symphony Orchestra conducted by Arturo Toscanini in a studio concert broadcast nationwide on radio.
Shostakovich had been awarded a Stalin Prize for the symphony.
The Music.
The first movement is a long, dramatic movement. Although it starts fairly quietly the middle section is very obviously a musical description of an invading army. It is a march, with a repeated rhythm on the snare drum, starting very softly, with the tune first heard in the strings who are playing "col legno" (with the wooden part of the bow. Each time the tune is played it becomes louder. People used to think that this theme described the invading German Nazi army, but nowadays musicians think it describes the brave Russian army, because it has Russian tunes hidden in it.
The second movement is called scherzo. It is a more light-hearted movement after the tension of the first movement. The third movement is slow and passionate and the finale is all about victory.
The orchestra is very large and includes two piccolos, cor anglais, Eflat clarinet, 8 French horns, 2 harps, a piano and a lot of percussion.
