The Stade de Suisse is a football stadium in Bern, Switzerland. It's the home ground of BSC Young Boys, wich is a Swiss football team. The Stade de Suisse is currently the second biggest football stadium in Switzerland.
General Information.
The Stade de Suisse was built on the grounds of the former Wankdorf Stadium, wich had been demolished in 2001.
The owner of the stadium is the Stade de Suisse AG. The stadium has a capacity of 32,000 spectators, all covered seats. The field is 105 m x 68 m and has got a artificial turf surface.
The construction costs were 350 million francs. Integrated into the roof are solar panels with a yearly production of 700,000 kWh. There is also one of the biggest shopping centres.
The stadium is 2 kilometers away from the city.
The stadium was officially opened on July 30, 2005, although the first match in the new stadium had already taken place on July 16 2005. Young Boys played against Olympique Marseille and lost 2-3 with 14,000 spectators watching. The match was considered an "infrastructure test", which is why no more than 14,000 tickets were sold.
The construction is called "Stade de Suisse, Berne, Wankdorf". But most people are used to calling it just,Wankdorf", although "Stade de Suisse" is the official name.
European Football Championship 2008.
The Wankdorf was one of the venues for the Euro 2008. There were played 3 group games. For the Euro 2008 they had to change the artificial turf. They put natural turf. After the event the stadium had again his usual ground. The reason for the artificial turf is that the stadium can also be used for concerts. So artist like Bon Jovi, Robbie Williams, Herbert Grönemeyer and bands like Genesis were there.
The hot seat.
All the seats are black or yellow, but there is only one red seat in sector A. It is called the hot seat. It's created for former player of Young Boys or prominent visitors. The first who sat on that seat was the most successful goalkeeper of Young Boys, Walter Eirich
Ice hockey attendance record.
A ice hockey game took place at the Stade de Suisse in January, 2007. SC Bern played against SC Langnau. The two rivals managed to fill the stadium with 30,076 fans. It was a record attendance in Europe.
