Sharks are part of a group of fish called cartilagenous fish with skeletons made of cartilage instead of bone. Cartilage is rubbery stuff that is softer than bone. Cartilagenous fish also include skates and rays. There are more than 350 different kinds of shark. Fossils have shown that sharks have been around for between 455 to 425 million years.
Most sharks are predators, meaning they hunt and eat fish, marine mammals, and other sea creatures, but some of the largest sharks eat small fish and krill, like whales. The largest shark is the whale shark, and it is the largest fish in the world. Some common kinds of shark include the hammerhead shark, the great white shark, the tiger shark, and the mako.
Many sharks are now endangered, but some are still hunted for food (like shark fin soup) or sport fishing.
Characteristics.
Sharks come in many different shapes and sizes, but most are long and thin (also called streamlined), with powerful jaws. Their teeth are constantly replaced throughout their lives. New teeth grow continuously in a groove just inside the mouth and move forward from inside the mouth on "conveyor belts" formed by the skin in which they are attached to.
Sharks have skin covered in thousands of tiny teeth-like scales that point to the tail. If you rub along a shark towards the tail, it would feel smooth, but if you rub the other way, it would be rough.
Senses.
Most sharks have an excellent sense of smell, which they use to find prey. Their two very sensitive nostrils can detect blood from miles away. As well as senses like ours, sharks have extra senses. They are very good at feeling vibrations in the
water, and they can detect electrical signals.
Prehistoric sharks.
Because sharks have skeletons made of cartilage, they don't fossilize easily. That's because cartilage is softer than bone and falls apart before fossilizing. However, teeth are harder, and if that isn't enough, they are shed throughout a shark's lifetime. Therefore, shark teeth are one of the most common fossils.
Sharks existed for at least two hundred million years before the dinosaurs. The earliest shark fossils were scales, so could it be that the earliest sharks were toothless? We are not sure. Early sharks did not look like sharks of today. For example, the upper snout of modern sharks is longer than the lower jaw. But in early sharks, they were the same length.
The first modern-looking sharks appeared in the Age of Dinosaurs. Sharks back then were preyed upon by giant sea reptiles.
Just a few million years ago, a giant shark called Megalodon swam in the seas. It was 16 meters long, twice as long as the closely-related great white shark, and it ate whales! Luckily for us, Megalodon died out 1.6 million years ago when the ocean became too cold for it.
