Sexual intercourse is what humans and animals do to make babies. Sometimes people have sex just for the fun, rather than to have children.
Sexual intercourse usually involves a man moving his erect penis in and out of a woman's vagina, creating friction. This sexually stimulates the man and woman, often to a point where they can have orgasms and the man can ejaculate.
Forcing someone to have sex (usually called rape) is a crime in many countries.
Reproduction.
Sexual intercourse is the natural and most common way to make a baby. It involves a man and woman having sex without birth control until the man ejaculates semen (which is made in his testicles) from his penis into the woman's vagina. The semen, containing sperm, moves to the Fallopian tubes, and if it finds an ovum on its way, it will try to fertilize it. If this works, the (now fertilized) ovum sticks to the side of the uterus and the woman becomes pregnant. The fertilized ovum then develops into a human. Medically, it is called a pregnancy until birth.
Sex for enjoyment.
People can have sex just for the stimulation and the emotional bond created between partners. If a man and a woman do not want a baby, they may use contraception, which is something that stops a baby from being made. One type of contraception is a condom.
Humans are not the only species on Earth that have sexual intercourse for enjoyment. It has been suggested that dolphins, and some other animals, do too.
Sexual preferences.
Who people like to have sex with depends on their sexuality. Usually, men like to have sex with women, and women like to have sex with men; they are called heterosexual or "straight". Men who like to have sex only with men are called homosexual or "gay". Women who like to have sex only with women are also called homosexuals, but are also called "lesbians". Some people like to have sex with both men and women. This is called being "bisexual".
Sexually transmitted infections.
There are some diseases that are caught by having sex, called sexually-transmitted infections (STIs), such as chlamydia, syphilis and gonorrhoea. A virus called HIV causes AIDS, which cannot be cured and can lead to death. using Latex condoms properly reduces the chance of some diseases being passed on.
Birth control, (for example, the female birth-control pill), can prevent pregnancy, but will not prevent sexual infections. Some diseases can be spread by sex or in other ways. For example, herpes simplex and hepatitis B could be caught by, say, a virgin without having sex, but can also be caught through sex.
Other kinds of sex.
There are many other kinds of sex. Two of them are oral sex and anal sex.
Oral sex.
Oral sex is when one partner uses the tongue, mouth or throat to excite the other partner's sex organs.
If someone is performing oral sex on a male, he or she may decide to swallow the semen if the male ejaculates in the mouth. There is no chance of pregnancy from swallowing semen.
One can get sexually transmitted infections from oral sex, such as herpes (which can be passed between mouth and groin or vice versa). Some STIs, like HIV, are much harder to pass through oral sex, but it is still possible.
Slang for oral sex is common in Western cultures, for example: "going down on", "brains", "giving a blowjob", or "giving head". The technical term for oral sex is fellatio if performed on a male and cunnilingus if performed on a female. When a man performs fellatio on himself, it is called autofellatio.
Anal sex.
Anal sex is when a man puts his erect penis into his sexual partner's anus.
Anal sex does not lead to pregnancy.
