Peter (Greek Πετρος, "rock") also called Simon (Cephas) Peter is one of the twelve apostles of Jesus. He is often talked about in the Bible. Most of what we know about Peter comes from the Bible. It is not known when Peter was born. But the date of his death is about the year 64 C.E. He died by being nailed to a cross in Rome. This type of death is called crucifixion. Some sources say that Peter died upside down. Others say he died right side up.
The Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Anglican Communion, consider Simon Peter a saint. Roman Catholics thinks that the Pope is Peter's successor. For this reason, he is the rightful head of all other bishops. Eastern and Oriental Orthodox also recognise the Bishop of Rome as the successor Saint Peter and the Ecumenical Patriarch sends a delegation each year to Rome to participate in the celebration of his feast. In the "Ravenna doumernt" of 13 October 2007 the representatives of the Eastern Orthodox Church agreed that "Rome, as the Church that 'presides in love' according to the phrase of St Ignatius of Antioch (To the Romans, Prologue), occupied the first place in the "taxis", and that the bishop of Rome was therefore the "protos" among the patriarchs. They disagree, however, on the interpretation of the historical evidence from this era regarding the prerogatives of the bishop of Rome as "protos", a matter that was already understood in different ways in the first millennium."
The historical accuracy of the accounts of Peter's role in Rome is a matter of ongoing debate.
In art, he is often shown holding the keys to the kingdom of heaven (interpreted by Roman Catholics as the sign of his primacy over the Church), a reference to Matthew.
Peter was married. The name of his wife is unknown nor is it known if he lived with her once he started his ministry.
The Bible tells us that Peter was responsible for letting people who were not Jews become Christians. This is important because, at first, only Jews were allowed to become Christians.
Saint Peter was the first leader of an early Christian community for at least 34 years. At that time the word Pope or "Papa" was not used to name the leader of the Roman Catholic Church. At that time there was only one Christian Church. Later, the Roman Catholic Church would say that Peter was their first Pope.
The remains of St. Peter are believed to rest in the Vatican City.
