Sum 41 (sometimes called The Sums) is a Canadian pop punk band from Ajax, Ontario. The people currently in the band are Deryck Whibley (lead vocals, guitar, keyboards), Cone McCaslin (bass guitar, backing vocals), and Steve Jocz (drums, percussion, and backing vocals). The band's most known lineup is the same, except with Dave Baksh on lead guitar and backing vocals.
In 1999, the band signed a record deal with Island Records. Since then, the band has released four studio albums. Their most successful album to date is "All Killer No Filler", The album had the single "Fat Lip", which did very well, making it the band's most successful single. The second single off the album, "In Too Deep", Also did well
They often perform more than 300 times in a single year; making them known for their long and worldwide tours, most of which last more than a year. So far, all of the Sum 41 albums have done very well in Canada. Sum 41 has received many awards and nominations. They have been nominated for seven Juno Awards (the Canadian equivalent of a Grammy Award), winning twice.
They are currently working on a new studio album, set for a 2009 release. New Studio Album 2009: "Complicity".
Beginnings and "Half Hour of Power" (1996–2000).
Sum 41 was formed on July 31, 1996 or forty-one days into the summer, hence the name ("Sum"mer "41" Days). The band was originally a NOFX cover band (a band that does songs of another band) named Kaspir; and they changed their name to "Sum 41" for a Supernova show on September 28, 1996.
In 1998 the band recorded a demo tape on Compact Cassette which they sent to record companies in hope of getting a signed. These demo tapes have become collection items among fans and are the only recordings known with the original bassist |Richard "Twitch" Roy.
From 1999 to 2000, the band recorded several of their stunts and crazy actions. The "Introduction to Destruction" and later the "Cross The T's and Gouge Your I's" DVDs both contained the self-recorded footage, among which were the band stealing pizza from a "Kelly's Pizza" with water guns and performing a dance to "Makes No Difference" in front of a movie theater.
Sum 41 released the EP "Half Hour of Power" on June 27, 2000. The first single (and only single from that album) released by the band was "Makes No Difference", which had two different music videos. The first video was put together using the video clips sent to the record label and the second showed the band performing at a house party.
"All Killer No Filler" and "Does This Look Infected?" (2001–2003).
Sum 41's first full-length album, "All Killer No Filler", was released on May 8, 2001. "Fat Lip", (which was the album's first single), did very well; it topped many charts around the world. After releasing "Fat Lip", the band released two more singles from the album: "In Too Deep" and "Motivation". The band spent most of 2001 doing shows; they played over 300 concerts that year (one of which was a Blink-182 concert they opened) before returning to the studio to record another album. They took the last week of the tour off due to the September 11 terrorist attacks. They later rescheduled the cancelled shows.
On November 26, 2002, Sum 41 released their second full-length album, "Does This Look Infected?". Whibley said of the album: "We don't want to make another record that sounds like the last record, I hate when bands repeat albums." The first single released was "Still Waiting", which was followed by "The Hell Song". "The Hell Song"'s music video depicted the band using dolls with their pictures on them and others, such as Ozzy Osbourne and Pamela Anderson. Their next single, "Over My Head (Better Off Dead)", had a video released exclusively in Canada and on their website, featuring live shots of the band. The video also appeared on their live DVD, "Sake Bombs And Happy Endings" (2003), as a bonus feature.
"Chuck" and the Congo (2004–2006).
In late May 2004, the band traveled to the Democratic Republic of Congo with War Child Canada, to document the civil war in the country. Days after arriving, fighting broke out in Bukavu near the hotel the band was staying in. The band waited for the firing to die down, but it did not during that time. A U.N. peacekeeper, Charles "Chuck" Pelletier, called for armored carriers to take the hotel's occupants out of the area. After nearly six hours, the carriers arrived, and the band and forty other civilians were taken to safety. Whibley later remembered of the incident: "Bullets were coming through windows and everyone was just lying on the ground with their hands on their heads. One bomb came too close, hit the hotel and the hotel just started shaking. Everyone dove and was lying on the ground. Things were falling off the walls, mirrors were breaking. That's when we all kind of realized that this was really going bad, and we're probably not going to make it out."
Because of of Chuck Pelletier, Sum 41 named their next studio album "Chuck"; it was released on October 12, 2004. A documentary of their trip was made into a film called ' and later aired on MTV. War Child released it on DVD on November 29, 2005, in the United States and Canada. The first single from the album was "We're All To Blame"; it was followed by "Pieces", a relatively soft song which reached the top of the charts in Canada. The next single was "Some Say", released only in Canada and Japan. The last single off the record was "No Reason", released at the same time as "Some Say", but with no music video and was only released in Europe and the USA, where it reached the sixteenth position on the Billboard Modern Rock charts in the USA.
On December 21, 2005, Sum 41 released a live album, entitled "Happy Live Surprise". It was only released in Japan. The CD contained a full concert recorded live from London, Ontario and was produced by Whibley. The same CD was released March 7, 2006, in Canada under the name "Go Chuck Yourself" (a play on words with the phrase "Go Fuck Yourself" and the album Chuck.)
Dave's departure and "Underclass Hero" (2006–2008).
On, May 11, 2006, Dave Baksh announced in a statement that he was leaving Sum 41 to work with his new band, Brown Brigade, which will have a more "classic metal" sound. Baksh cited "creative differences" as the reason for his departure but claimed that he was still friends with the band.
The next day, Whibley confirmed Baksh's departure and announced that the band would only replace Dave with touring guitarist Tom Thacker (of GOB), who would not make any decisions in the band or be in any videos, photo shoots, or perform on any albums.
Recording of the band's fourth studio album, "Underclass Hero", began on November 8, 2006 and finished on March 14, 2007. The album was released on July 24, 2007 debuted at number seven in the United States, the band's highest U.S. chart position. The album was backed by the first single (and title track), "Underclass Hero". The album was nominated for a Juno Award for "Rock Album of the Year" but lost to Finger Eleven's "Them vs. You vs. Me".
On April 17, 2007, the band released a song on iTunes, "March of the Dogs". Although the song was 0not a single, the band released it early because, according to Whibley, "the record [wouldn't] be out until the summer". Whibley was threatened with deportation for the song, because he sings about "killing the president" in it. Two more singles were released from the album, "Walking Disaster" and "With Me".
In October 2007, the band began the "Strength In Numbers Tour", which was a tour of Canada with Canadian band Finger Eleven; Die Mannequin opened each of Sum 41's shows. During the tour, Whibley sustained a herniated disk (a bad back injury); as a result, they canceled the rest of their shows.
After Whibley recovered from his injury, the band started the "Underclass Hero" tour in March 2008. They toured until early July, when they got ready for their next album.
New studio album Complicity and "Greatest Hits" (2008–Present).
On August 7, 2008, McCaslin announced in a journal entry on the band's official site that the band was currently taking time off from touring to do other things. After that, they would begin working on the band's next studio album. McCaslin worked on the second album by his side-project, The Operation M.D. Jocz continued to tour as a drummer for The Vandals, and Whibley toured with his wife, Avril Lavigne.
Sum 41 recently released a press release denying rumors that Lavigne and Whibley were splitting up. The release also mentioned that because of the success of "Underclass Hero", Universal Music picked up the option to have Sum 41 produce a new album in 2009. They have started work on a new album, and will also be touring during 2009.
Sum 41 recently announced that they will release ', a greatest hits album, in Japan on November 26, 2008. The album will include a previously unreleased song, "Always", and a DVD, which contains each of the band's music videos.
Internet videos.
Touring during "Chuck", Sum 41 played videos before their set which were deemed "unsuitable for children". Some people were upset over some of the videos' violent content. They have made several other videos, including "Basketball Butcher" and "1-800-Justice", which were originally available exclusively on Sum 41's now-defunct fan club, the Goon Platoon.
Sum 41's most recent internet video project is a "weekly" series, "SUM 41 - Road to Ruin". The trailer was posted on January 8, 2007 on the Sum 41 web page. The first episode debuted on January 21; it followed their exploits on their Singapore 2003 tour. Since then, their episodes have included footage of
