Sailor Moon is an anime and manga written and drawn by a woman named Naoko Takeuchi. The series is about a girl named Usagi Tsukino, but she is called Serena on the English TV version and "Bunny" in the English manga (because "Usagi" means "bunny" in Japanese). Usagi can use magic powers to become Sailor Moon. She is a soldier who fights evil using the power of good. It was on for 14 years, but in Minneapolis, Minnesota, it's on Saturday Mornings on NBC.
Usagi also has some friends who fight evil. They are named Sailor Mercury, Sailor Venus, Sailor Mars, and Sailor Jupiter. They make up a team called the Sailor Senshi ("Senshi" means "soldier" or "guardian"). The Sailor Senshi are named after different planets in the solar system. Each of the Sailor Senshi uses magic powers to become a Sailor Senshi. They are also young Japanese girls. Their real names are not Sailor Mercury, Sailor Venus, Sailor Mars, and Sailor Jupiter. For example, when Sailor Mercury is not fighting evil, her name is Ami Mizuno (Amy in English). The name of Sailor Venus is Minako Aino (Mina in English). The name of Sailor Mars is Rei Hino (Raye in English). The name of Sailor Jupiter is Makoto Kino (Lita in English).
Mamoru Chiba (called Darien Chiba in the English anime and Darien Shields in the English manga) is Usagi's boyfriend. He uses magic powers to transform into a man named Tuxedo Mask, who fights evil along with the Sailor Senshi. In the future, Usagi and Mamoru get married and become the king and queen of the moon. Their daughter, named Chibiusa (Rini in the English version), travels through time to help them and the Sailor Senshi.
Usagi has a cat named Luna. The cat is named Luna because "luna" is the Latin word for moon. Minako has a cat named Artemis after the Greek goddess of the moon (although Artemis is a male cat). Luna and Artemis are not ordinary cats. They can talk, and they have moon symbols on their foreheads. They can also turn into humans in the manga, and Luna turns into a human in one of the anime movies. In the future, they have a kitten named Diana (Diana is the name of the Roman moon goddess).
Later there are some other Sailor Senshi. They are named after the planets Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto (now a dwarf planet). Sailor Saturn's real name is Hotaru Tomoe. Sailor Uranus' real name is Haruka Tenoh (Amara in English). Sailor Neptune's real name is Michiru Kaioh (Michelle in English). Sailor Pluto's real name is Setsuna Meioh (Trista in English). In the manga and the Japanese anime, Haruka and Michiru are lesbians, but in the English anime they were changed to cousins. This is because the English anime was made for younger children than the Japanese anime.
