Themis Music is a Canadian music endeavour which includes a Wicca music group, a studio in Toronto, Ontario and a "Band Camp" retreat in Northern Ontario.
Incipient Wicca Music Genre.
A strong thread in the artistic work of Themis music is the Wiccan love of life and nature. Lyrical references to the "Love of Life", the "Forest of Life", "the Honeyed Fountain", "the gentle caress of a warm summer breeze" focus on the Wiccan belief in nature's divinity.
Themis Music has drawn nature-loving Wiccans from all over the world. Themis promotes unity among all peoples through the power of music and common beliefs.
Studios.
Themis Music operates studios in Ontario, Canada and contracts out the studios for professional recording, digital editing, mastering, production and musical arrangement.
Ontario Band Camp.
Themis Music organizes the 'Ontario Band Camp' each year in the third weekend of September. Held on the beautiful Lake Joseph, Themis Band Camp's purpose is to facilitate the practice of musicians helping musicians. This rich nature experience reinforces the Wiccan belief in nature's divinity. The entire process is deeply tied to nature and giving back to the environment.
Melodic Wicca themes.
Wicca themes carry throughout the artistic works of Themis Music. Themis is unique in combining classic rock elements with a progressive and decidedly gothic sound.
"The songs are melodic and tell stories with Wicca themes" (nature-based doctrine not to be confused with witchcraft in any way), such as a profound love of nature, a reverence for all life, and the power of nature's omnipotent rule over man's mortal law. Appropriately named after Themis, the Greek Titan Goddess of divine law and order.
Themis and Wicca.
According to a WebRadio review "Themis has launched into something original, friendly, Gothicus and evolving between the light and the darkness some time between the Middle Ages and tomorrow."
A Wiccan duo.
Themis band members "The Countess" and Ruffian Angel form both a musical and religious partnership: they are a High Priest and a High Priestess who have each undergone the three degrees of Wiccan initiation.
The two promote Wiccan philosophy in their songs and written texts/articles.
Ecology and nature.
Themis delivers songs with hauntingly beautiful melodies, vividly descriptive stories, accompanied by an entertaining live act. The songs carry through and meld with one another as in a rock opera, promulgating their message: "The beauty of this day is not lost on me...On this wooden log in the Forest of Life, I carve my flute with my hands and my knife for the Love of Life" as in their song 'Love of Life'.
