Themis is a Canadian gothic rock duo from Toronto, Ontario.
Significant New Music Genre: Wicca Rock.
A strong thread in the artistic work of Themis is the Wiccan love of life and nature. Lyrical references to the "Love of Life", the "Forest of Life", "the Honeyed Fountain", "the gentle caress of a warm summer breeze" focus on the Wiccan belief in nature's divinity.
Themis Music has drawn nature-loving Wiccans from all over the world. Themis promotes unity among all peoples through the power of music and common beliefs. The Countess and Ruffian Angel form both a musical and religious partnership: they are a High Priest and a High Priestess who have each undergone the three degrees of Wiccan initiation.
The two promote Wiccan philosophy in their songs and written texts/articles. Embedded in the Canadian duo's music and their published explanations of the Themis's musical inspirations, is a clear adoption of Wiccan ecology and feminism.
Studios.
Themis Music operates studios in Ontario, Canada as well as contracting out the building of music studios for professional recording, digital editing, mastering, production and musical arrangement.
Canadian Band Camp.
Themis Music is one of the principals organizing the 'Ontario Band Camp' each year in the third weekend of September. Held on the beautiful Lake Joseph, Themis Band Camp's purpose is to facilitate the practice of musicians helping musicians.
Melodic Wicca themes.
Wicca themes carry throughout the artistic works of Themis Music. Themis is unique in combining classic rock elements with a progressive and decidedly gothic sound.
"The songs are melodic and tell stories with Wicca themes" (nature-based doctrine not to be confused with witchcraft in any way), such as a profound love of nature, a reverence for all life, and the power of nature's omnipotent rule over man's mortal law. Appropriately named after Themis, the Greek Titan Goddess of divine law and order, this two piece band has a spirit, a philosophy and a big sound.
Themis and Wicca.
According to a webRadio review "Themis has launched into something original, friendly, Gothicus and evolving between the light and the darkness some time between the Middle Ages and tomorrow."
A Wiccan duo.
The duo describe themselves as "Vegans. Eclectic Gardnerian Wiccans. Musicians"," in their bio at http://www.themismusic.com
Ruffian Angel has a large repertoire of musical background, starting his musical career in high school as a drummer and gradually widening his horizons to encompass guitar, vocals, composing, song writing, and more. Ruffian Angel is the lead of the band, combining powerful vocals with unrelenting guitar leads.
The Countess (Kathleen) makes her debut in a rock band on the drums in Themis. The Countess also supplies second vocals, complementing Ruffian's powerhouse voice.
Ecology and nature.
Themis delivers songs with hauntingly beautiful melodies, vividly descriptive stories, accompanied by an entertaining live act. The songs carry through and meld with one another as in a rock opera, promulgating their message: "The beauty of this day is not lost on me...On this wooden log in the Forest of Life, I carve my flute with my hands and my knife for the Love of Life" as in their hit 'Love of Life'.
Creed.
Themis Music publishes a creed of sorts. Themis Music Studios favour musicians with a pagan or Wiccan flavour.
Themis lyrics speak of awe in watching the sunrise or sunset; the forest of life in the light of a glowing moon; a meadow enchanted by the first light of day; the morning dew on the petals of a beautiful flower; the gentle caress of a warm summer breeze upon one's skin; the warmth of the summer sun on one's face; the fall of colourful autumn leaves; and the softness of winter's snow.
Themis lyrics describe cycles of nature as holy days: the earth a temple, its plants and creatures as partners and teachers advancing respect of life, cherishing the free will of sentient beings, and accepting the sacredness of all creation.
