TruthOut.org is a political website aimed at providing another choice to mainstream news sources. It was started after the 2000 presidential election with the idea to, in its own words, "hoping to reach a few people, have some small impact on the dialogue, and maybe try to restore a little integrity." It claims to receive more than 4 million visits per month.
Some of its most important authors <--origianlly contributors, anyone have a better word?--> include William Rivers Pitt, Jason Leopold, Scott Galindez, David Bacon, Dean Baker, Tom Engelhardt, William Fisher, Dahr Jamail, Ray McGovern, J. Sri Raman, Norman Solomon, David Swanson and James Zogby. The company has reported a lot on the anti-war movement and helped to make Cindy Sheehan better known by using many of her writings. Attention is also given to problems including the environment, work (and work ethic), women, health, and voter rights. Its articles are now carried by press release information centers like, and.
Truthout is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. It has been attacked by some people for always asking for money, when the company took in about $1,500,000 in 2007 and paid Director Marc Ash over $188,000 in yearly bonuses.
The website also had a blog where visitors can talk about various issues or specific articles, which was taken down a short time ago.
Karl Rove Indictment Controversy.
On May 13, 2006, Truthout.org reporter Jason Leopold wrote that White House Deputy Chief of Staff Karl Rove was thought as part of the government look into the Valerie Plame problem. On May 19th, after almost a week had passed with no announcement of the problem, Truthout.org Executive Director Marc Ash issued a "partial apology".
On June 14, in response to news reports that Special Counsel Patrick Fitzgerald would not be bringing up charges against Rove, Truthout Executive Director Marc Ash said that TruthOut was "standing down the Rove matter." He wrote, (in part), "Obviously there is a major contradiction (difference) between our version of the story and what was reported yesterday [by the mainstream media]. As such, we are going to stand down on the Rove matter at this time. We defer instead to the nation's leading publications." And to the position of Jason Leopold, Ash writes, "There is no indication (evidence) that Mr. Leopold acted unethically (incorrectily)," and, "[W]e stand firmly behind Jason Leopold."
Blocking by Internet Service Providers.
As of September 13, 2007 those receiving Truthout's news-letters have found that the site's emails are often blocked, put down as "spam" or otherwise brought away from the main inbox. Some users have reported success by adding Truthout's email address to their address book but Truthout claims that Microsoft Hotmail, Yahoo Mail, and until recently, AOL Mail have shown evidence that Truthout's messages are being worked with due to Truthout's "reputation".
