A transposing instrument is an instrument tuned to a given number of semitones above or below 'concert pitch'. Most non-transposing instruments are tuned to play in the key of C.
In the case of a transposing instrument, the entire series of notes is notated and labelled moved up or down a number of semitones. EG: playing the note C on a B flat clarinet produces is the equivalent pitch of the note Bb when played on a piano. All transposing instruments such as 'horn in F' or 'alto saxophone in Eb' are referenced back to 'concert pitch', and the note 'C' as written and played on that particular instrument will sound on a concert instrument as an 'F' or 'Eb' respectively.
Woodwind particularly the recorder and Clarinets are transposing instuments.
Saxophones and all brass instruments are transposing instruments.
Historical Notation.
The use of transposed notation probably originates from the gradual developments in instrument making. The 'clarinet in C' existed in Mozart's time but was later replaced by the larger, richer sounding 'clarinet in Bb'. The fingering remained unchanged, aiding the transition of players from the older to the newer instrument. It is perfectly feasible that learners of the modern day instrument in Bb, could adopt new fingerings to account for this discrepancy, but all published music would have to be transposed back to 'concert pitch'.
Natural Harmonic Series & Timbre.
Instruments such as horns and woodwind have a natural harmonic series: it is easier and louder to play in certain keys, meaning that successful orchestration for transposing instruments must respect the tendencies of these instruments. Traditional pythagorean harmonics are not balanced for equal temperament, and hence are only possible to play in tune in certain keys.
Having transposing instruments makes it possible for monophonic pipes to play in several different keys. The fingering can remain the same, only the fundamental pitch, harmonic series and timbre change as the different sizes of instrument are deployed. A cor anglais is like an oboe but a fifth lower (a written C sounds like an F). Any oboist can play the cor anglais, reading the music and playing with normal oboe fingering. It will automatically sound a fifth lower (five notes of a scale). Compare this to recorders which are not transposing instruments. On a descant recorder the note played with 3 fingers of the left hand (1-2-3-0-0-0) is a G. To play a G on a treble (alto) recorder the fingering is 1-2-3-1-2-3. This can be confusing at first, but with practice players can get used to changing between the different sizes of recorder.
Professional clarinettists will need two clarinets: a B flat and an A clarinet. Some clarinet cases are made to hold both instruments. Some clarinettists also play the bass clarinet. This is also in B flat, but sounds an octave lower than the ordinary B flat clarinet. There is also an E flat clarinet which sounds a minor third higher than written.
Saxophones transpose into different keys according to their sizes. Brass instruments come in several different keys. It is always important for a player to come to a rehearsal or concert with the correct instrument. Often brass players become skilled at transposing i.e. if their music is written in the wrong key for the instrument on which they are playing they can still play it in the right key.
