The Crucible is a 1950s play about the Salem Witch Trials by Arthur Miller.
Miller wrote this play during the time of McCarthyism in America. Many people were afraid that communism would stop the American way of life. Some people falsely accused their enemies of being communists during this time. Miller writes about the ideas of fear and false accusation in this play.
Characters.
Tituba- Servant to Reverend Parris, from the Barbados Islands
Abigail Williams- His niece, former servant to John and Elizabeth Proctor
John Proctor- Farmer in the town, had an affair with Abigail Williams, has two sons, is accused of being a witch
Elizabeth Proctor- John Proctors wife, accused of being a witch by Abigail Williams and had sex.
Plot.
In the beginning of the story, Reverend Parris is looking at his daughter, Betty. She is asleep on her bed and cannot wake up. They know that she is not dead, but she doesn't move or speak. She just lies there. Parris heard that Betty and other girls were dancing in the woods. (This was a very bad thing at the time.)
Reverend Parris's slave, Tituba, is from Barbados. Abigail says that she put a spell on Betty so she would not wake up. Parris is angry with Tituba. He makes her say that she was a witch, and the devil made her curse Betty. Suddenly, Abigail and Betty both say that they were with the devil too, so they would get out of trouble. They say that other people are witches too. Abigail also says Elizabeth is a witch.
When John hears this, he gets very angry. He tries to help his wife and other "witches" in the court. He tells the court how well he knows these people and that they cannot be witches.
However, he gets into trouble and someone says that "he" is a witch. He is very respected in the town, and so the judges ask him to admit that he works with the devil. He will be able to live if he lies.
Firstly, he signs a letter that he works with the devil. Then he destroys the letter instead of lying. He wants to live so he could look after his family, but chose to keep his respect instead. He is tried and the court kills him by hanging. However, the court allows Elizabeth to live because she is pregnant. Abigail runs away because she thinks that people know she told lies.
In the end, many people were killed by the court because Abigail lied. When judges realised this, they let the other "witches" live.
