Tibet (Tibetan name: བོད་, Chinese name: Xizang) is an autonomous region of China in the Himalayan mountains in South Asia. It has common borders with Nepal. Its capital is Lhasa. Most of the Tibetans are Buddhists. In Tibet, they call this place "Bod".
Tibet's religious traditions make it a place of fascination to other countries. The local monks are sometimes said to have special, superhuman abilities. Whether or not this is true, the writings of Tibetan monks are sometimes shared with outsiders, and are lauded for their insight. The "Tibetan Book of the Dead" contains rituals for the dead and dying, similar to the Catholic Last Rites rituals.
The religious leader of Tibet's Buddhists is called the Dalai Lama. He was the ruler of Tibet before he was forced to leave the country when the Chinese army took over. The Dalai Lama presently lives in exile in India, but often visits other countries.
Tibet becomes part of China.
Tibet officially became part of the People's Republic of China in the 1950s. Some people say that it has been a part of China from at least 18th century in the Qing Dynasty.
Influence outside Tibet.
Tibetan culture also influences other regions nearby, such as Nepal, Bhutan, and some regions in India, most notably Sikkim and Ladakh. China claims part of the Idian province of Arunachal Pradesh as South Tibet.
Unrest.
There has been some protest in Tibet since China took control in the 1950s. Most of them have been because of social or economic problems. Some of them have been because there are people who believe Tibet should not be a part of China. A railway line, the Qingzang railway, has been built, linking China to Lhasa. Also, rising prices of food, and difficult access to higher education have angered many people. The railway line also raised fears about more migration. This situation has led to some violence against people from outside Tibet. Some of this violence occurs outside Tibet. When it comes to assigning government posts in Tibet, more Chinese seem to be assigned, and less Tibetans. The Chinese Government claims that if Tibet would be released (become independent again), its economy would suffer.
See also.
Arunachal Pradesh
