Titania is the biggest moon of Uranus and the eighth biggest moon in the Solar System.
Discovery.
Titania was found on January 11, 1787 by William Herschel. He reported it and Oberon the same year. He later reported four more moons, which turned out to be spurious.
Name and pronunciation.
The names of Titania and the other four moons of Uranus then known were suggested by Herschel's son John Herschel in 1852 at the request of William Lassell, who had found Ariel and Umbriel the year before. Lassell had earlier supported Herschel's 1847 naming scheme for the seven then-known moons of Saturn and had named his newly-found eighth moon Hyperion in accordance with Herschel's naming scheme in 1848.
All of the moons of Uranus are named for characters from Shakespeare or Alexander Pope. Titania was named after Titania, the Queen of the Faeries in "A Midsummer Night's Dream".
Shakespeare's character's name is pronounced, but the moon is often pronounced, by analogy with the familiar chemical element titanium.
It is also designated Uranus III.
Physical characteristics.
So far the only close-up images of Titania are from the "Voyager 2" probe, which photographed the moon during its Uranus flyby in January, 1986. At the time of the flyby the southern hemisphere of the moon was pointed towards the Sun so only it was studied.
Although what its interior is made up of is uncertain, one model suggests that Titania is made of about 50% water ice, 30% silicate rock, and 20% methane-related organic compounds. A major surface feature is a huge canyon that dwarfs the scale of the Grand Canyon on Earth and is in the same class as the Valles Marineris on Mars or Ithaca Chasma on Saturn's moon Tethys.
Occultation.
On September 8, 2001, Titania occulted a faint star; this was a chance to both refine its diameter and ephemeris, and to detect any extant atmosphere. The data revealed no atmosphere to a surface pressure of 0.03 microbars; if it exists, it would have to be far thinner than that of Triton or Pluto.
