"Titanic" is a 1997 romantic drama movie directed, written, and co-produced by James Cameron about the sinking of the RMS Titanic. It stars Kate Winslet and Leonardo DiCaprio as Rose DeWitt Bukater and Jack Dawson respectively, members of different social classes who fall in love aboard the ill-fated 1912 maiden voyage of the ship.
The film was both a critical and commercial success, winning eleven Academy Awards including Best Picture, and became the highest grossing film of all time, with a total worldwide gross of $1.8 billion.
It's most famous line is "I'm the King of the World!", said by Jack Dawson. In 2005, it ranked 100 on AFI's list of the one hundred most popular quotes of all time. Two years later, it was the 83rd most popular movie on the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies 10th anniversary list.
Plot summary.
In 1996, treasure hunter Brock Lovett and his team has reached the most famous shipwreck of all - the RMS "Titanic". Emerging with a safe believed to contain a famous diamond called the "Heart of the Ocean", he discovers that the safe does not hold the diamond, but a drawing of a beautiful young woman wearing it. When Lovett is later interviewed on television, he shows the drawing to the cameras, and Rose Dawson Calvert, now 101, recognizes the young woman in the drawing - herself. She and her granddaughter Lizzy visit Lovett on his research ship over the wreck, and tells her story of the "Titanic" and its ill-fated maiden voyage.
In 1912, 17-year-old society girl Rose DeWitt Bukater boards the ship's first class suites with her fiance, steel magnate Caledon Hockley, and her mother, Ruth DeWitt Bukater, in Southampton. Also boarding are poor artist Jack Dawson and his best friend Fabrizio De Rossi, after a lucky poker game wins them in steerage. When Rose attempts suicide by jumping off the stern in third class, Jack pulls her back onto the ship... and a bond is forged between them as Jack is invited by her into first class the following day. Rose's mother and Cal try desperate measures to keep them apart as Jack and Rose fall in love, until the "Titanic" collides with an iceberg and is critically damaged. Now Jack and Rose must fight to stay alive, as their passionate romance becomes a struggle for survival, but Jack is already doomed because of his lower status as a steerage passenger.
