Transsexualism is identifying with a sex or gender role other than the one that was set out for an individual at birth. Transsexual women, women who were born into a male role, often use female hormones, or Hormone Replacement Therapy to reduce their testosterone levels and evenually lose the functionality of their reproductive organs. Conversely, transsexual men, men who were born into a female role, use testostrone to acquire male features, such as facial hair and a deeper voice. Both types sometimes undergo Gender Reassignment Surgery to remove their reproductive organs.
In the past no transsexual person would ever be given medicines or surgery until they had lived as the other sex for a while. This was usually for one or two years. It was sometimes called a "Real Life Experience" (RLE) or "Real Life Test" (RLT.) The reason for this was to make sure that the person really knew what life would be like after transition. However, many transsexual people hated the RLE. This was partly because they felt that doctors did not respect them enough to make their own decisions. It was also because some transsexual people were placed in terrible danger by the RLE. If a transsexual women had a deep voice, facial hair, and was two meters tall, it would be "very dangerous" for her to go into a women's restroom even if she wore a dress and make-up. Today, some doctors will treat people before they have a RLE.
MTF Treatments.
MTF transsexuals take female hormones: estrogen and sometimes progesterone. They also take medicines to make their body stop making or responding to testosterone. These are called 'anti-androgens.' (Androgen means male sex hormone.) Often this is spironolactone.
Hormonal treatments for MTF transsexuals (transsexual women) does not work as well as it does for FTM transsexuals. It causes breasts to grow, but it will not reverse many of the effects of testosterone. It does not make beards go away. It does not make voices higher. So transsexual women have to do many other things to make their bodies more female.
They have treatment to remove their facial hair. This is usually through electrolysis. This is a treatment where electricity is applied to the hair that kills the hair so it does not grow back. This is a painful treatment that can cause scars if done wrong. Transsexual women have to have many electrolysis treatments over months to years.
Sometimes transsexual women with deep voices may have surgery to raise them. However these surgeries are dangerous and do not work very well. So many transsexual women try to make their voice sound higher and more female without surgery. Sometimes they go to voice coaches to get help with this.
Many transsexual women also get surgery on their genitals. The most common surgery is a 'vaginoplasty.' Usually this is done by making a vagina from the skin of the penis which is turned "inside out". This surgery is often very effective. It is a myth that some transsexual women have had examinations by gynecologist (doctors who specialize in women's medicine) who did not figure out they were transsexual. The vagina will never look exactly like a real one, and there will be scars on each side of the new labia majoris.
Some transsexual women also have "Facial Feminization Surgery" (FFS) to make their face more female-looking. They may also have surgery to make their breasts larger if the hormones are not enough.
FTM Treatments.
FTM transsexuals also take hormones. Testosterone works much better for FTM transsexuals than estrogen does for MTF transsexuals. Testosterone will make a transsexual man's voice deeper. It will make a beard grow (and can cause baldness!) Testosterone also cause menstruation to stop.
Some transsexual men may be able to be seen by people as completely male after a year or two of testosterone. This is especially true if he has small breasts.
Transsexual men also get surgery. The most common surgery is a mastectomy (removal of breasts.) After a mastectomy, most transsexual men are completely accepted as men in society, because they look exactly like non-transsexual men except for their genitals.
However, many transsexual men also want genital surgery. Some just get a "total hysterectomy" which is removal of the uterus and ovary. Some may also get surgery on their outside genitals.
The two most common surgeries are a phalloplasty and a metoidioplasty. A phalloplasty takes skin and tissue from somewhere else on the transsexual man's body and makes it into a penis. A metaidioplasty takes the clitoris (which grows bigger with testosterone) and puts it where the penis usually is. The urethra where urine comes out can be made longer and run through the "new" penis. This allows a transsexual man to urinate through his penis.
The advantage of the phalloplasty is that it looks more like a normal penis. But it does not work as well to have and enjoy sex. A metaidioplasty has more sexual function, but it looks "very" small. This is because the clitoris, even with testosterone for years usually only gets about 5-6 cm long.
Often these surgeries also have "scrotoplasty" which makes a scrotum from the labia. They may also have a removal or closure of the vagina.
