Tropical Storm Harvey was a strong tropical storm that moved across the Atlantic Ocean from August 2 to August 8. Harvey caused no damages or killed any people and was the eighth named storm of the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season.
Harvey formed from a tropical wave to the southwest of Bermuda on August 2 and passed close to Bermuda on August 4, bringing heavy rain to the island. The storm then began to move east and away from Bermuda, which the storm then reached its strongest strength with 65 mph (100 h) before becoming an extratropical cyclone on August 8. The system then stayed in the northern Atlantic Ocean for a few more days before it died.
Storm history.
A tropical wave moved west from the African coast on July 22 and journeyed across the Atlantic Ocean without any development. When the wave came across the Leeward Islands on July 28, the National Hurricane Center began to watch the system closely for any possible strengthening, which did not happen at that time. By August 2, conditions had become more favorable and Tropical Depression Eight formed about 350 miles (595 km) southwest of Bermuda.
The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Harvey the next day. But a lot of wind shear gave Harvey some subtropical characteristics and also made the official forecasts to underestimate the future strength of the storm.
Harvey passed 45 miles (75 km) south of Bermuda early on August 4, with winds of 60 mph (90 km/h), before removing its subtropical characteristics to become a "fully tropical" storm. As it moved northeast away from the island, the storm strengthened more to its strongest with winds of 65 mph (100 km/h). Without any notice, more wind shear did not cause Harvey to weaken somewhat, although the storm's path did become confusing. Harvey became a strong extratropical storm during the night on August 8. The storm lived for a few more days before dissipating northwest of the Azores on August 14.
Impact.
As Tropical Storm Harvey came closer to Bermuda, a tropical storm warning was given out late on August 2 and because of the possibility Harvey to continue strengthening and become a hurricane; a hurricane watch was also given out 24 hours later. As the storm began move away from Bermuda on August 4, first the hurricane watch and then the tropical storm warning were cancelled.
Harvey brought heavy rain to Bermuda, with just over 5 inches (130 mm) reported at Bermuda International Airport and caused some flooding of the roads. In addition, there was a report of sustained winds of about 45 mph (75 km/h) on the island. The storm did not kill any people or cause any damages on its own on the island.
Naming and records.
When Tropical Storm Harvey formed on August 3, it was the earliest time ever in a season that the eighth tropical storm formed, beating the previous record held by Hurricane Eight from 1936 by 12 days. This was the fourth time that the name Harvey had been used to name a tropical cyclone in the Atlantic and the sixth time worldwide. But because Harvey failed to create any major damages or kill any body, its name was not retired by the World Meteorological Organization and will be on the list of names for the 2011 Season.
