Taurus is an astrological sign, which is with the constellation of the same name. Under the tropical zodiac, Taurus is occupied by the Sun from April 20 to May 20, and under the sidereal zodiac, it is currently from May 14 to June 19.
Mythology.
In mythology, Taurus is often with the Greek myth of the bull-form taken by Zeus in order to win Europa. Taurus is also associated with the Greco-Roman goddess Aphrodite/Venus and sometimes also the goddesses Hera/Juno, Ishtar, Isis, Freyja, and Frigg and the gods Pan, Dionysus/Bacchus, Xolotl, and Quetzalcoatl.
Personalities.
Taurus is the second sign of the Zodiac and Taurus is to do with desire for material things, and emotions. People born in Taurus are calm, patient, reliable, loyal, affectionate, and ambitious. There is also something about their appearance, which makes people excited, which makes them comfortable to be with. They are also strong, secure and stable. But they can sometimes want to have everything, or be stubborn, insecure, rigid, and be lazy and slow.
They can also be jealous easily.
Taurus is ruled by Venus. Taurus is said to have the woman side of Venus,and are very attractive. It is also the most woman-like sign in the zodiac.
The Indian version of Taurus is Vrishabha, the Chinese version is the Snake
Relationships.
The Taurus person is very affectionate in love, sensual, and instinctively aware of the power of their body sexually. However, they are also very possessive and stubborn, and tend to get extremely jealous when they do find a mate, who can please their sensual side, and they feel threatened by an outsider.
Occupation.
People born in Taurus are able to do jobs where people with perseverance, practicality and responsibility are given rewards, for example; builders, farmers, bankers, civil servants, accountants and artistic jobs, especially singing and sculpture, because they are good at works to do with hand.
Body and health.
In medical astrology and anatomy, Taurus is said to rule the vocal chords, tonsils, palate, throat, neck, ears, and lower jaw.It is said that they have larger reproductive organs.
