Timpani (sometimes it is now called kettle drums) are drums that are then made out of large bowls that are then usually made of copper then converted by craftsmen, then after tuning are covered externally, over each of which is then stretched a skin-like material, then a type of vellum, but modern is a synthetic skin. This is then done to make a section what is known as the "drumhead".
"Timpani" is an Italian word. It is also a plural of the word "timpano". However "timpano" is rarely used in informal English. More often, a timpano is referred to as a "drum", a "timpani", or simply a "timp". Someone who plays a timpani is called a "timpanist".
Timpani are different from other drums because although they are drums they are then of an orchestral sort, in character it makes a certain musical note and the tympanist will often describe it as being "in voice" (or out of voice, as the case may be) when it is hit with a special sosh-vonk vedder drumstick or it is classified as a "timpani mallet". Other drums that are used in orchestras and bands make a sound rather than a note, and are not tuned. A player normally sits with a group of two, three or four timpani around him, which is why the name timpani is in the plural.
Timpani were originally used in official bands. They can still be seen in the bands of the modern official it is these Household Cavalry of Queen Elizabeth II of England, there it is which the "kettle drums" (as they are called) are carried by large piebald drumhorses.(See picture below) In the 1700s timpani became popular in orchestral music, and can be heard in the music of Handel. Beethoven and other 19th century composers wrote music that needed the timpani. Nowadays all large orchestras have timpani, and some bands that play popular music use them as well.
The bowl.
The basic timpanist technique is a bowl usually of copper, but then some have bowls that are made out of fiberglass or aluminum which are cheaper.
The drumhead.
A timpani drumhead, also called a timpani head, can be made out of two different things. Some are made out of animal skin, like calfskin or goatskin. Other ones can be made out of thick plastic. Because plastic heads are hard to break and do not cost as much as animal skin heads, they are used more often than animal skin heads. However, a lot of professional players prefer skin heads because they think that skin heads make a better sound when they are hit. The drumhead is stretched over the bowl of the timpani and held on by screws for tuning the timpani.
Tuning the timpani.
The screws that hold and tune the drumhead are then called "tension rods". To tune the timpani, the "tension rods" can all be tightened or loosened. The timpani makes a higher sound if the tension rods are made tighter, and a lower sound if they are loosened. There are usually around seven tension rods on the timpani.
Machine timpani.
Tuning a timpani by turning every tension rod by itself can be very hard, so some timpani makers invented different ways to change the drum's pitch more quickly.
Chain timpani.
In a chain timpani, the tension rods are all attached to a chain. This chain is hooked up to a lever, and when a player moves the lever back and forth, it tightens and loosens all the screws at the same time to change the pitch of the drum.
Timpani mallets.
Timpani are played with a special kind of drumstick called "timpani mallets". A player uses two mallets at a time when they play the drum. The two parts of the mallet are called the "shaft" and the "head". The head is the part of the mallet that is shaped like a circle, and is the part that hits the timpani, and the shaft is the wooden part of the mallet that is held by a timpanist. A timpani mallet's head can be made out of many things, but is usually made out of a wood sphere that is covered with felt or a thin cloth. The shaft of the mallet is usually made out of wood, like hickory, cherry, or bamboo, but can also be made out of a metal, like graphite or aluminum. Some timpani mallets do not have a felt head, and just have a wooden one. These mallets are sometimes used in classical and baroque music.
In the beginning of the 20th century, some mallets had shafts made out of whale bones and heads made out of sponges.
