"The Wizard of Oz" is a 1939 movie from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, based on L. Frank Baum's novel of the same name.
Success.
The movie has been considered, among many others, to be one of the greatest ever made. In 1998, it was sixth on the American Film Institute's 100 Years... 100 Movies list.
Plot.
Dorothy Gale (Judy Garland), a girl who lives in Kansas, and her dog Toto, are caught in a tornado that takes her to a fantastic land called Oz. The house that she is in kills the Wicked Witch of the East, she finds out from Glinda (the Good Witch of the North).
Arriving at the Emerald City, their villain, the Wicked Witch of the West, flies over them, writing out "SURRENDER DOROTHY" in the sky. When Dorothy and the others go to see the title Wizard himself, he says that he will only help them if they can get the Witch's broomstick. Then flying monkeys capture the group and send them to the Witch's castle.
The Witch asks for Dorothy's ruby slippers, but, since they cannot be taken off, she orders one of her monkeys to kill Toto. The dog escapes, and finding Dorothy's friends, leads them to the castle.
Dorothy is now inside a chamber with an hourglass and crystal ball. She will die if the hourglass runs out of sand.
Meanwhile, the Scarecrow, Tin Man and Lion try to save their friend, dressed up as the Witch's guards. As the three are about to rescue her, the Witch stops them, but Dorothy grabs a bucket of water and throws its contents on her. In doing so, the Witch melts down to nothing.
When the four travellers return to the Wizard (with the broomstick), he tells them to come back tomorrow. Yet Toto discovers that the "Wizard" is no more than just an ordinary "humbug", who entered Oz after a hot-air balloon accident. This leaves them surprised.
However, he gives, using magic instead of psychology, a diploma to the Scarecrow; a clock in the shape of a heart to the Tin Man; and a badge of courage to the Lion.
Soon after, the Wizard gives Dorothy a chance to return to Kansas on his balloon. But, just as he is about to leave, Toto gets off the balloon to chase a cat. When Dorothy gets him, the Wizard takes off without both of them.
Now, her only chance to go back home is found in Glinda. She tells Dorothy to click her heels three times, and say "There's no place like home" over and over again.
When she and her dog finally return, she finds out it was all a dream, and tells her family and friends about her adventures. Dorothy hugs Toto, and says to her Aunt Em that there is truly no place like home, thus ending the movie.
