"The Lion King" is a 1994 animated Disney movie that was the most successful animated movie of the 1990s. The movie is about a young lion prince who learns about his place on the throne of Pride Rock and his role in the circle of life. It is dedicated to Frank Wells, who was the president of The Walt Disney Company until his death just a few months before the film was released into theaters on June 15, 1994. It was the first full-length Disney film to feature no human characters since "Bambi". Unlike previous Disney animated films, much of the voice acting work was done by well-known actors, including James Earl Jones, Jeremy Irons, Matthew Broderick, Whoopi Goldberg, Rowan Atkinson, Jonathan Taylor Thomas, and Nathan Lane. It is a musical; the songs have music by Elton John and lyrics by Tim Rice. Computer animation was used a lot in the creation of the movie, especially during the "Circle of Life" and stampede sequences. During production, this film was considered a secondary project compared to the next film scheduled, "Pocahontas". However, as the movie was being marketed, the studio noticed that the released teaser which consisted of the entire opening sequence featuring the song, "Circle of Life", was getting a strongly reaction from audiences. Furthermore, when the movie was in limited release in two major theatres, the movie did very impressive business which suggested that this "secondary project" promised to be popular. Upon general release, the movie more than confirmed that suspicion by becoming the most successful movie of the year worldwide (in the United States, "Forrest Gump" was most successful of that year) and the most successful animated feature film of all time until "Finding Nemo". Since then, "Shrek 2" has surpassed Finding Nemo making "The Lion King" the third most successful.
The story.
Simba is Mufasa's son, and Mufasa is the current lion king and rules a kingdom named Pride Rock. However, Mufasa's younger brother Scar is jealous of Simba and Mufasa and wants to replace Mufasa as king. Scar can't become king unless Mufasa and Simba both die. Scar becomes friends with three hyenas and promises them food if they help him kill his brother Mufasa and nephew Simba and take control of the throne. Scar and the hyenas trick Simba so that he is sitting in a dried up river, where Scar sends a big herd of stampeding Wildebeast to kill him. Mufasa finds out that his son is in danger and goes to save him. He jumps down into the stampede and pulls Simba out before Simba is killed and throws Simba onto a rock where he is safe. However, as Mufasa tries to climb the cliff to safety, Scar comes over and pushes him off the rock. Mufasa falls into the stampede and dies. Scar still has to get rid of Simba before Scar can be king, so he tells Simba that it's his fault Mufasa is dead. and that he should "run.Run away and never return."Then he tells the hyenas to kill Simba. They chase him down a cliff of Cacti, but Simba still esapes. One of the hyenas bumps into the pile of cacti and comes out screaming.Simba is still running off so the hyena in the (who's name is Banzi) tells the other two to go after Simba, but Sheinzi,the second hyena(the third one is an idiot named Ed) says "There ain't no way I'm goin' in there! What,you want me to come out looking like "you", Cactus-Butt?!" So they let Simba go,while shoutting thearts from above.Meanwhile,Scar tells everyone about the stampede, only he says Simba is dead, not knowin that the hyenas didn't really kill him. He then takes over the kingdom and becomes King, since that he's the closest in the family. Simba grows up with his two new friends, Timon and Pumbaa. He learns to live with a new motto, "Hakuna Matata", which means "No worries" in the African language Swahili. Simba grows up to be a strong lion when he is reunited with his childhood friend Nala, whom he knew back when his father Mufasa was still alive. She tells him about Scar's evil reign of terror and begs Simba to return to challenge Scar. Simba goes home to challenge Scar for the throne, and eventually Scar tells the truth that he was the one who killed Mufasa. There is a long battle and Simba defeats Scar, claiming his rightful place as the true lion king. Nala becomes Simba's queen and they soon have a cub of their own.
Awards and nominations.
"The Lion King" received many award nominations, including the Academy Award for Best Original Score (by Hans Zimmer) and the Golden Globe award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy, both of which it won. Most notably, the song "Can You Feel the Love Tonight" by Elton John and Tim Rice won the Academy Award for Best Original Song, the Golden Globe for Best Original Song, the BMI Film Music Award, and the Grammy Award for Best Vocal Performance Male.
Sequels and spin-offs.
"The Lion King" was so successful that Disney created a direct-to-video sequel called ' and a spin-off television series called "The Lion King's Timon and Pumbaa". A second direct-to-video sequel, "The Lion King 1½", was released on February 10, 2004. The movie was remastered for IMAX, being re-released on December 25, 2002, and on October 7, 2003, as a 2-Disc Special Edition Disney DVD.
Controversies surrounding "The Lion King".
The movie has had its share of controversy. These are just some examples.
Main controversies.
There was some criticism from the gay community regarding a thing about the movie's villain, Scar. In one scene of the movie it appears as if animators had written the word "sex" into several frames of animation -- the intention, however, was the letter combination "SFX" (for "special effects"). And there was dispute over the origin of the story, as it bears a striking resemblance to a Japanese animated television show "Kimba the White Lion", so much so that apparently even some animators thought they were doing a remake.
"The Lion Sleeps Tonight".
The use of the song "The Lion Sleeps Tonight" in a scene with Timon and Pumbaa has led to disputes between Disney and the family of South African Solomon Linda, who composed the song (originally titled "Mbube") in 1939. In July 2004, the family filed suit, seeking $1.6 million in royalties from Disney. In February 2006, Linda's heirs reached a legal settlement with Abilene Music, who held the worldwide rights and had licensed the song to Disney for an undisclosed amount of money.
Hidden racism.
Upon its release, some critics complained that the hyenas in the movie were negative racial stereotypes of urban blacks and Hispanics. It has been argued that "despicable hyena storm troopers speak...in racially coded accents that take on the nuances of the discourse of a decidedly urban, black, and Latino youth."
Hamas' propaganda.
In August 2007, the Hamas terrorist organization produced an animated propaganda movie that made fun of the style of "The Lion King". The programme was aired on their television station, "Al-Aqsa TV". Hamas was portrayed as a lion that chased and killed rats that bore the likenesses of members of the secular Fatah organization in Gaza. The programme was shortly aired but was pulled off the air for revision.
Appropriateness for children.
Despite being given a "G" rating by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), there has been criticism that "The Lion King" (as well as many other Disney films) has adult content. This includes the death of a main character, Mufasa. The British version of the movie had a warning on the VHS box stating that some scenes may be upsetting for very young children. Simaliar controversies have been created with Disney's movie "Bambi", as the story is simaliar and so is the controversy aout a certain death of a certain main character, only in "Bambi" it is even more controversal because Bambi was the first Disney movie to introduce this, and the death is more upsetting. In "Bambi", Bambi and his mother are eating grass and suddenly Bambi's mother catches Man's scent and tells Bambi to run. As they run, Bambi makes it back to the thicket, but his mother is gone. He desperatly calls out for her, wandering around, untill his father comes and tells him "your mother can't be with you anymore".
Musical.
The movie was also adapted into an award-winning stage musical of the same name. The stage show first opened on November 13, 1997 in New York City, and was an instant and tremendous success. A version later opened London, England, and another in Toronto, playing there until January 2004.
