Theodore Robert "Ted" Bundy (born November 24, 1946 - executed January 24, 1989) was one of most prolific serial killers in United States history. He killed over 30 people, perhaps as many as over 100, before being arrested and executed.
Biography.
Ted Bundy was born in 1946 in Vermont, USA. He lived with his mother and grandfather when he was a child. Bundy and his mother moved to Washington where she married a man named John. As a child in Washington, Bundy was a good student and went to church often, yet he found it hard to make friends and he began stealing. As a young man Bundy became involved in politics and proposed to a woman that he had dated in high school. He left her a few days later and then went on the begin his murders. The people that Bundy would murder were much like this lady: young, white skinned (Caucasian) and with long dark hair parted in the middle.
Bundy's first known murders were in 1974 with his first known violent attack on January 4 when he crept into the room of an 18 year old girl called Joni Lenz and beat her with a crowbar while she was asleep. He then sexually assaulted (raped) here with a metal rod that he took from the bed. She was found the next morning in a pool of blood. She was not killed but would remain in a coma (a permanent sleep) and suffered brain damage (damage to the brain that stop the body from working properly).
A few weeks later on January 31 Bundy broke into another womans basement and beat her over the head. He then dressed her, wrapped her in blankets and carried her away. She was found a year later in Seattle, Washington with no head. In between this time and June, 1974 he killed 8 more women in Washington. In June he kidnapped Janice Ott and Denise Naslund from a park near Seattle. These attacks, unlike the attacks before, were in 'broad daylight'; infront of other people.
In Autumn, Bundy moved to Utah to begin studying law at a college there. He began killing again in October. Bundy kidnapped and killed three girls in October of 1974, one of them was the daughter of a police officer. On November 8, Bundy told a girl that he was a police officer and he told her to get in his car. She did, believing he really was a police officer. He then tried to handcuff her but she would not let him and she jumped out of the car and escaped. Bundy was angry that she had got away and so a few hours later he kidnapped another girl and killed her. Her body was never found.
Bundy was still living in Utah in 1975 and was still attending law school but he began only killing people in Colorado. Bundy kidnapped and killed four women from Colorado and one more from Utah in the first half of 1975 (January to June).
On August 16, 1975, Bundy was arrested for not stopping his car when ordered to by a police officer. When they searched his car they found a ski mask, a crowbar, handcuffs, trash bags and other items that they thought he must have been using to rob houses. The police then noticed that his car was the car the girl who escaped had told them about. Bundy was sentenced on March 1, 1976, to fifteen years in prison for kidnapping her. Bundy escaped from the police twice in 1977 before he could be sentenced for the murders he had committed. By early 1978 he had made his way to Florida where he killed two more women and injured three others. After that he murdered a 12 year old girl called Kimberley Leach. She was the last girl murdered by Bundy as he was stopped by a police officer on February 15, 1978.
Bundy went on trial on June 25 to July 31 for the murders he had committed. He was sentenced to death by the electric chair. In the time he was in prison and waiting to be executed he helped the police investigate other murders and in 1988 he admitted to having killed 8 more women than he was tried for. Bundy was executed on January 24, 1989. He was 42 years old.
