Tajikistan is a country in Asia.
Geography.
Tajikistan is one of the new countries in central Asia. It is west of China, north of Afghanistan, east of Uzbekistan and south of Kyrgyzstan.
Tajikistan is landlocked and it is in the middle of the continent of Asia.
Its total area is only about 143,100 km². It is slightly smaller than Wisconsin, USA. Tajikistan’s borders are 3,651 km long.
The climate has hot summers and mild winters.
Almost all of the country (85 percent) is mountainous with river-valleys running across, however high altitude mountains of Pomir are in the eastern part of the country, (which is beginnings of Hymalayas in the west). The climate there is semiarid to polar. The mountains cover an area of about 120,000 km². There are other countries within the mountain range. The mountains are between 3600 to 4400m high.
History.
The land that is now Tajikistan has been lived in since 4,000 BC. It has been under the rule of various empires throughout history, mostly the Persian Empires.
In the year 800, Islam came to Tajikistan.
In 1868, Tajikistan became a Russian Colony. It later became a part of the Soviet Union.
On 9 September 1991, after long periods of mass protests against Soviet Government, Parliament of Tajikistan declared independence from Soviet Union, and held first presidential elections.
Rahmon Nabiev who run the country during Soviet Union in the late 70s and early 80s, become president. But because he was unable to bring any much needed reforms to the country, there were protests in the capital city, Dushanbe.
The government responded by organising a pro-government demonstration, mainly made of old Communist Party members and people from the southeast of the country brought to the city. Anti-government protests did not stop, so the government gave weapons to the pro-government demonstrator. Then the Opposition armed themselves.
After this bloody civil war broke out. In which all of the new democratic parties, political organisations and movements together with the political Islamic movements created an alliance, opposing the old communist government and southerners.
After the September 11, 2001 attacks, many American and French Soldiers came into the country.
Political information.
Tajikistan is a republic. The capital city is Dushanbe. The official language is Tajik,which is a dialect of farsi (persian).
Tajikistan is also a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the CIS. Tajikistan is number eight in size of the CIS.
