"Tekken 5" is a fighting video game made by Namco. It was released on the PS2 in 2004.
Story.
After the end of King of Iron Fist Tournament 4, father Kazuya Mishima and son Jin Kazama, battle each other at Honmaru, located within the Mishima estate. Jin quickly beats his father. The oldest Mishima, Heihachi, enters the Honmaru to find his son defeated and unconscious. Heihachi and Jin begin to fight. During the fight, Jin begins to manifest the Devil he got from his father, Kazuya. Just as it appears that Jin will kill Heihachi, Jin suddenly gains control of his body and flies away.
Suddenly, a bunch of "Jack" robots interrupt the battle. Both Kazuya and Heihachi are surprised at the attack, and begin fighting as a team against the Jack robots. During the battle however, Kazuya betrays his father, throws him into the Jack robots and runs away. Raven, watching on top of the cliff, speaks into a headphone and says: "Heihachi Mishima...is dead."
After hearing of Heihachi's death, people though that it would bring the end of the Mishima Zaibatsu. However, an unknown person had taken control, and a month later Mishima Zaibatsu announced the opening of The King of Iron Fist Tournament 5
Tekken 5: Dark Resurrection Story.
Following the end of the King of Iron Fist Tournament 4, Heihachi Mishima defeated Kazuya Mishima and led him to Honmaru Temple, planning to let both his son Kazuya and his grandson, Jin Kazama, battle and steal their respective "Devil Genes". However, Jin defeats both of his predecessors and flies away, leaving the latter two unconscious. Shortly after, several Jack-4 robots invade the compound, programmed to take Heihachi's life. At the start, Kazuya and Heihachi fight the Jack-4's as a team, but eventually Kazuya throws Heihachi across the room as soon as he notices that Heihachi is getting tired. Then, Kazuya turns into Devil Kazuya and escapes, leaving Heihachi to deal with the Jack-4's by himself. They quickly overwhelm him and explode, leaving Heihachi seemingly dead. The explosion however, revives Heihachi's father Jinpachi Mishima from his 50 year sleep beneath the Temple, and proceeds to reclaim the Mishima Zaibatsu. A few months later, the King of Iron Fist Tournament 5 is announced. It turns out that Heihachi survived the explosion, and now pledges to find out and "break the neck of the one who started this ridiculous tournament!"
