Texas is the second largest state in the United States. It is larger than France. In 1845 it became the 28th state in the Union. Texas has been controlled by Spain, France, and Mexico before declaring its independence from Mexico in 1836. It was its own country, The Republic of Texas, for 9 years.
The largest cities in Texas are Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth, San Antonio, El Paso, and Austin. Austin is the capital city of Texas.
There are many famous attractions in Texas. Fort Worth is known for its stockyards, and Amarillo is known for the cattle business and stockyards. In Dallas IT companies such as Texas Instruments and EDS have their offices.
San Antonio has The Alamo, and Houston has the Johnson Space Center. Austin has The University of Texas at Austin. Texas A&M in College Station and Texas Tech in Lubbock are other important universities in the state.
Etymology.
The state's name derives from táyshay, a word in the Caddoan language of the Hasinai, which means "allies" or "friends".
History.
Texas was first explored in 1528 by Spanish explorers on accident (they arrived when their ship sunk off the coast). It didn't become a colony until 1685 by France. In retaliation, Spain set up a rival colony in 1691 by setting up religious outpost in the eastern part of Texas. Spain didn't come back to Texas until 1716 to protect its colonies in the west from French forces. Two years later, San Antonio was founded.
The pressure between the Spaniards and Native Americans in East Texas stopped many settlers from coming to Texas. To stop the violence and increasing Native American raids, Spain called a truce between many tribes in 1745 and 1789.
Tensions didn't rise in Texas until The USA bought Louisiana and large amount of land from France in 1803. The tension was lifted in 1819 when the United States recognized a river to be part of Texas.
When Mexico got independence from Spain in 1821, Texas became part of Mexico. American and other settlers came into Texas when Mexico allowed non-Spanish settlers to settle here. After many settlers came to Texas, Mexico started taxing non-citizens. This made many settlers outraged. Those from the South got even more outraged when Mexico started banning slavery (many southerns saw slavery as a way of life back then). On March 2, 1836, Texas declared independence from Mexico. To prevent this, Mexico and Texas went towar against each other and Texas won. In 1845, the US annexed Texas. This angered Mexico, so It and the US went to war. The United States won the war (and got Arizona, California, New Mexico, southwestern Colorado and Nevada in the process).
During the Civil War, Texas left the Union and joined the newly formed Confederate States of America (which lost to the Union). After the war, It remained a republic until March 30, 1870, when congress let Texas back into America.
On January 10, 1901, oil was found in Texas, leading the founding of a richer economy. Durin a period of economic hardship, many people lefted Texas. exas didn't regain its population it lost until the 1950's and 60's. In recent years, Texas has been exploring technology and computers.
Geography.
Texas is the second biggest state in the Union (after Alaska) and is bigger than every European country except Russia. It has mountains, deserts, plains and coasts.
