"Thrillville" is a PlayStation 2, Xbox and PlayStation Portable game made by Lucasarts and Frontier. Players make their own theme park. They make roller coasters, game stalls, rides, race tracks, and food and drink shops.
Story.
Uncle Mortimer, a strange scientist, puts the player in charge of Thrillville, a large theme park with roller coasters, games, rides, and racetracks. The player then picks a character. The character can be moved through each theme park. He must try to finish missions in the theme park before he can move on to the next one.
Garrison, a bad, rich, theme park owner, has his own theme park called Globo-joy. Globo-joy competes against Thrillville. The player must do difficult tasks to make Thrillville the best theme park.
Minigames.
Thrillville has many minigames that can be played in the theme park, or with up to four other players.
Entertainer: Players must hit the right button at the right time to make the cheerleaders dance to the music
RC wars: Players must drive remote-control cars into each other, to try to make the other car blow up.
Event Horizon: Players can pick between four space ships, each with a different weapon, to blast other enemy ships.
Robot Invasion, Hauntings, Pirate Raiders, and Wild Frontier: Players move around in a battle arena. They can shoot either the other players or robot enemies.
Star Sniper, Ghoul Gunner, Blackbeard's Booty, and Prospect Stakeout: Players shoot targets that pop out of certain areas.
Dune Buggy, Anti-Grav Racer, Go-karts, Monster Truck, and Formula Thrills: Players race to the finish on a race track.
Trojan Quest: Players can pick between four heroes, each with a different weapon, to kill enemy skeletons and evil monsters.
Luftwaffe 109: Players can pick between four airplanes, each with a different weapon, to shoot down enemy airplanes and bombers.
Trampolines: Players bounce on a trampoline, doing crazy tricks in the air.
Saucer Sumo: Players control a flying saucer and try to bump the other players off the edge of the ring.
Saucer Soccer: Players control a flying car and try to get the soccer ball and shoot it into the goal.
Minigolf: Players play a game of miniature golf, where they hit the ball lightly with a golf club and send the ball into a hole.
Sparkle Island: Players play as a cat-like hero and shoot blobs.
Mechanic: Players arrange tubes to fit on a board, to connect one part of a circuit board to another.
Groundskeeper: Players suck up the trash and wash the vomit that has collected in the theme parks.
Thrillville: Off the Rails.
Off the Rails, the second part of the series, came out in 2007 for the PlayStation 2, Wii, Xbox 360, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable and Microsoft Windows. "Off the Rails" allows roller coasters to crash, more minigames, more options, and more fun. Also, Off the Rails has a good amount of songs, such as "Parklife" by Blur and "Smile" by Lily Allen.
