Touchstone Pictures (also known as Touchstone Films in its early years) is one of several alternate film labels of The Walt Disney Company, established in 1984. Its releases typically feature more mature themes than those that gets released under the Walt Disney Pictures banner.
Touchstone Pictures is merely a brand and does not exist as a separate company: the two de facto companies behind it are Walt Disney Motion Pictures Group, Inc. and Walt Disney Pictures and Television.
Ratings.
Walt Disney Productions' film "The Black Hole" (1979)was the first Disney movie to get a PG rating. Over the next few years, Disney experimented with more PG-rated fare, such as the 1981 film "Condorman", 1982's "Tron" and 1983's "Never Cry Wolf" and "Trenchcoat".
First release.
Started by then Disney CEO Ron W. Miller in 1984, Touchstone's first release was "Splash". "Splash" included brief nudity on the part of star Daryl Hannah and occasional language, earning a PG-rating. Yet another Disney film label was started in 1990, Hollywood Pictures, with the release of "Arachnophobia".
Later releases.
Many films from the Walt Disney Motion Pictures Group have during the course of their prior release dates been shifting between the Walt Disney Pictures, Touchstone Pictures and Hollywood Pictures names before finally settling for one. Examples include; "Who Framed Roger Rabbit", "Dick Tracy", "The Rocketeer", "The Nightmare Before Christmas", "The Santa Clause", "Remember the Titans", "Sweet Home Alabama", "Bringing Down the House", "National Treasure", "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" and '.
Touchstone Television.
The studio's former television division, Touchstone Television Productions, LLC (formerly known as Touchstone Pictures and Television and later Touchstone Television), is known for producing the series "The Golden Girls", "Blossom", "Boy Meets World", "My Wife and Kids", "Desperate Housewives", "Lost", "Grey's Anatomy", and "Scrubs". The latter four series are now produced by successor company ABC Television Studio.
