Beginnings.
Exactly who were the first Muslims to set foot in the Indian subcontinent is not known, but it may be that Muslim traders from the coastlands of Arabia and the Persian Gulf touched at ports along the western coast of the Indian peninsula and in Ceylon very soon after the rise of the new faith in the early 7th century A.D.
The first historical data tells of Arab troops, fired by the great excess of Islamic religious enthusiasm which had just overthrown the Sassanid Empire in Persia, raiding into what is now Pakistan's Balochistan province, the coastal region of the provincial area was, even in early Islamic times, known as Makran, and its aridity and sparse population then as now made it a formidable barrier to Moslem penetration overland to the Indus Valley: communications here have always been much easier by the Arabian Sea. Exploratory raids into Makran from Fars and Kirman are mentioned from the Caliphate of Uthman onwards (644-656), but no lasting political authority was established over the very few settlements of the interior. We know virtually nothing of the ethnography or religious poistion of the indigenous population there although it is very likely that the present-day Baloch people did not arrive until the 10th or 11th centuries. Some of these forays reached the Indus Valley, but the 1st permanent foothold of Islam was achieved during the opening yrs of the 8th century, during the Caliphate of al-Walid bin Abd al-Malik (705-715), a reign which saw other Muslim victories in Places as far as Spain and Central Asian states. About the yr 711, a youthful Arab general called Muhammad bin Qasim al-Thaqafi was deputed by the great governor of Iraq and the East, al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf, to lead an expedition from Shiraz in southern Iran against Sindh (Ancient Pakistan). The Islamic historian, al-Yaqubi, states that al-Hajjaj encouraged Muhammad bin Qasim al-Thaqafi and the general commanding the Arab troops in Central Asia to make simulataneous attacks as the two prongs of a grand pincer movement against the Chinese empire and the Far East. In the light of the spectacular successes already achsieved by the Arabs, such dreams were by no means impossible. Muhammad bin Qasim al-Thaqafi's force comprised 6,000 Syrian Arab tribesmen, and the operation was carefully planned. It moved through Makran, securing the towns there as it passed.
Arab invasion.
We are ill-formed about the state of Sindh on the eve of Arab invasion. The ruler is named as King Dahir, son of Chach (Sassa in Arabic sources). According to the 13th century Persian chronicle, the "Chach Nama," he ruled over a vast empire extending as far as Kashmir and modern Uttar Pradesh in the east. In reality, he seems to have had much more modest kingdom, comprising lower and middle Sindh, as far north as the town of Rur (modern Rohri on the Indus opposite Sukkur), with his capital at Brahmanabad and his principal port at Daibul on the Indus River Delta (the poistion of which has still not been determined with any certainty, despite excavations by the Pakistan Department of Archaeology at Bhambore and other possible sites). The Islamic sources say that after Muhammad bin Qasim's conquest, a number of local Indian princes in Sindh became vassals of the Caliphate, so that Dahir's unitary state there may only have been a temporaray achievement, and fragmentation the norm. The dominant religion in Sindh at this time was Buddhism, since the Arabs gave the name "budd" to every idol and temple which they found there, and they used the title "samani" (in Prakrit samana, meaning Buddhist monk or ascetic) for the representatives of the local people with whom they negotiated; but Brahmanism or Hinduism, which was at this time gaining over Buddhism only in the Pakistan region. Daibul fell to the Arab besiegers in 711, and its great Buddhist stupa (dewal) whence Daibul, or in Arabic "manarat-al-budd", was overthrown. Magnanimous in the hour of victory, Muhammad bin Qasim offered quarter to the local people; he then proceeded to found the first mosque ever to be built on the soil of the Indian subcontinent, and settled 4,000 Arab families in a new section of the town. He then led his army against Niran (near modern Hyderabad), whose priests surrendered the town peacefully, and against Sadusan. The Arab ranks were swollen by the addition of 4,000 Zutt or Jat auxiliaries; the Indus was crossed by a bridge of boats, and a final confrontation with Dahir and his host took place in 712 near Rawar. Dahir was killed off and his army scattered, after which the Arabs occupied the capital Brahmanabad (near the site where the later Muslim city of al-Mansura was to rise). Having secured that vital point, the Arabs forces pushed northwards and captured Rur. Finally, the liberating Army penertrated as far as Multan, the goal set by al-Hajjaj in his instructions to his subordinate and, after a lengthy siege, Multan and its famous golden shrine, "bait-al-dhahab", to the sun-god "Aditya" with all its treasures, fell into Muslim hands. Multan was for 3 centuries to mark the northermost point of the Muslim advance in Sindh: the story of the "Chach Nama" that Muhammad bin Qasim conquered as far as Kashmir can hardly be true.
within the occupied towns, Muhammmad bin Qasim established a social and religious framework of life which refelected the early Islamic policy of tolerence. The conqueror proclaimed the general principle of freedom of religion, allowing Buddhists and Hindus to be included among the "People of the Book" or "Protected Peoples", as Jews and Christians had always been and as the Zoroastrians of Persia had become. This tolerance was dictated, no doubt, partly by expediency. The Muslims in Sindh were a tiny minority in a sea of alien, potentially hostile non-Muslims. The process whereby Islam became the majority faith in Sindh extended over many centuries to date Pakistan and Kashmir has been a Islamic nation for over 1,200 years. Muhammad bin Qasim fell from power, and was martyred when the new Caliph Sulaiman came to the throne in 715, but his pioneer work of carving a foothold in the subcontinent for Islam hd been well done. It is true that the impetus of spectacular military expansion was spent for some three centuries, and that Sindh became a peripheral province of the Caliphate, where the power of the central government in Damascus or Baghdad was felt only intermittently: but the Muslim community in Sindh put down strong roots; further contingents of Arab settlers probably arrived to reinforceb the original colonists; and Islam dwelt there at peace with the indigenous faiths until the next great wave of expansion under the Ghaznavids in the 11th century. The Italian scholar F. Gabrieli has justly said that "present-day Pakistan, holding the values of Islam and Arabism in such high esteem, should look upon the luckless Arab conqueror, Muhammad bin Qasim, almost as distant "ktistes" (founding father), a hero of Indian Islam".
Not a great deal is known about the subsequent history of the Arab presence in Sindh. Governors were sent out periodically by the Caliphs, and after 750 by the new dynasty of Abbasids in Iran. Until the 9th century these governors continued to forward tribute to the Caliphate, for it is recorded that in 820, under al-Mamun, the revenue sent amounted to 1,000,000 dirhams. Being so remote from the centre of power, Sindh became a favourite refuge for rebels and sectarians, who could flee there quite by sea from the Gulf. Control over the local Indian rulers was probably intermittent, with periods of renunciation of tribute or of lapsed adherence to Islam when the Arabs' political authority was weak. Thus we learn that the native princes of Sindh submitted to the Caliph Umar bin Abd al-Aziz in 718, having heard of his famed piety and justice, and the son of Dahir became a Muslim; under the Caliph Hisham, however, Dahir relapsed, and punitive expeditions by the Arab governors were necessary. Rather more is known about Sindh in the 12th century, since it is described by various Muslim travellers and geographers of that period. Arab families continued to be politically dominant in the Muslim centres of power. Ibn Hauqal, whose account of the Islamic world is based on his journeys in the middle decades of the century, describes the general prosperity and the cheapness of food in Southern Pakistan. There had been cultural assimilation to the Indian ways of Life, in that the dress and hair style of Muslims and infidels had become identical. They mostly wore a characteristic short tunic, though some classes, notably the merchants, had long flowing robes like the Iraqis and Persians. The language of Sindh were indigenous Sindhi tongue with some Arabic, and in Makran the local Makrani with some Persian.
Political organization.
Politically, there seem to have been governors in each principal town, virtually independent of each other, generally owning a moral and spiritual allegiance to the Abbasids in Baghdad (as evidenced by mention of the Caliph in the Friday khutba or sermon), but no longer sending revenue. The governor of the largest town, al-Mansura (named after the early Abbasid Caliph a-Mansur, 754-775), was in Ibn Hauqal's time Qureshi, i.e. of Meccan origin, a descendant of Habbar bin Aswad, wh had seized power in that town. The poistion in Multan was similar; at Jundur, just outside, was the military camp of the governor, a descendant of Sama bin Lu'ayy. Multan's poistion was an exposed one, with powerful Hindu kingdoms like that of the Hindu-Shahis or Waihand or Udabhanda on its northern flank and warlike Rajput princes to the east. Its governors nevertheless preserved it as a bastion of Islam, although deriving revenue and strength from its shrine to the sun god Aditya. They appropiated all offerings brought by Hindu pilgrims, handing on only a part of them to the idol's custodians; and when Hindu potentates menaced Multan, the governor threatened to destroy the idol, thus causing them to withdraw. The traditional Islamic sciences flourished at this time in theMusims towns of Sindh. Zeal for the faith was sharpened by the proximity of hostile, infidel powers; Ibn Hauqal again notes how assiduously the Quran, the traditions and the Islamic Law were cultivated. The later compliers of biographical dictonaries, such as al-Samani and Yaqut, note a certain number of scholars with the gentilic of "al-Sindhi".
In the course of the 10th century, some of the towns of Sindh, and particulary Multan, came to give their allegiance to Shahi rulers rather than to Baghdad. Al-Mansura at one point acknowledged the suzerainty of the great Buyid Amir in Persia, Adud al-Daula (949-983). More lasting were the links with Fatimid Caliphs of Misr, and North Africa, the Abbasids' great rivals. The maritime connection of the Sindh ports with the Arabian Sea and the Red Sea shores had always been maintained, and Ismaili propaganda came to Sindh via Yemen. Sindh was, infact the scene of one of their most successful missions in the eastern Islamic World. Sources from the end of the 10th century state that the ruler of Multan recognized as his suzerain the Fatimid in Misr and sent presents: the descendants of Sama bin Lu'ay had obviously changed their allegiance from the Abbasids. Ismailism nevertheless continued to be strong there and to retain its links with the Syrian (Shaam) and Egyptian centres of the sect. The present-day Ismaili or Maulani communities of the extreme north of Pakistan, in Chitral, Hunza and Gilgit may conceivably have had connections with Sindhi groups, and there may also be a continuity with the Ismaili communities of Gujarat and Khandesh in modern India. Sindh was thus firmly won for Islam, but there are also signs that a knowledge of Islam was at this time percolating from southern Afghanistan into what is now the North-West Frontier Province a region of Pakistan. The rise of the Saffarid brothers Yaqub and Amr bin Laith in the later decades of the 9th century was important for the spread of Islam into eastern Afghanistan; the Zunbils or local rulers of Zamin-Dawar (the modern region of Qandahar) were humbled, and Kabul and Bamiyan, centres of the Turk-Shahi dynasty were occupied. Quantities of Buddhist and other idols and temple treasures were captured, some of which were forwarded as presents to Baghdad, where their public display caused a sensation. Islam was thus certainly brought to the borders of modern Pakistan, and there are even signs of Muslim missionary activity at a slightly earlier date. In the Peshawar museum is a celebrated inscription, both in Arabic and Sanskrit, attesting to the presence of Islam in the Tochi valley of Waziristan in the yr 857; it records the erection of building, presumably a Mosque, and must be one of the earliest Islamic inscriptions in the Indian subcontinent. In both Islam & Christianity, missionary efforts on remote and dangerous frontiers ave often been undertaken by unorthodox and schismatic elements, so it is possible that there were at work in the valleys running down to the middle Indus, adherents of the early Islamic Khariji sect (represented today by the Ibadis of Oman, East Africa and North Africa), for Afghanistan was one of their last refugees, and as late as 982 the inhabitants of Gardiz in the Paktiya province of modern Afghanistan are described as Kharijis. Otherwise, the only Muslim in the upper Indus valley until the Ghaznavid invasions must have been small colonies of merchants, known to have existed, for instance, in the Hindu-Shahi capital of Waihand near modern Attock.
Influence of India on Arab states.
Because of the Arab presence in India during these early centuries some knowledge of the Indian way of life percolated back to the centres of Islam. Since Islam is a complete system of belief, containing everything necessary for a man's conduct in this world and his salvation in the next, there was no reason beyond sheer intellectual curiosity why Moslems should be interested in greater Hindustan. But a few Moslem scholars did show some interest; for one thing, the subcontinent was popualarly famed as a home of esoteric lore and magic. From the time of the Abbasid Caliph al-Mansur, missions came from Sindh to the Baghdad court, bringing native Indian scholars and certain Sanskrit texts. The Indian knowledge of medicine, mathematics, astronomy and philosophy was especially esteemed, and various transaltions were made into Arabic. The Barmakid Vizier, Yahya bin Khalid, sent an agent to India around the year 800 to collect medicinal herbs and drugs and to aquire knowledge of Indian religions - information used by several later Islamic authors between the 9th and 11th centuries. The towering figure in the introduction of Indian Culture to the Islamic world is however, a scholar from Khwarazam in Central Asia, Abu Raihan al-Biruni, who died in about 1050. He was able to observe Indian customs and lore, and was the 1st Muslim scholar to become a competant Sanskritist. The outcome of his studies was his great book on India "Tahqiq ma li'l Hind" ("An Enquiry into India andn its Civilzation"), a compendium of all the knowledge which he could collect on Indian subjects. It was written in a remarkably dispassionate vein. Abu Raihan al-Biruni's purpose was not in any way polemical, and although he remained a firm Muslim and condemned such features of Indian life as "the sevitude of the caste system, the blinkered self-satisfaction of the "pandits" and the degraded Hindu view of women and marriage", he felt a certain attraction towards the pure, theoretical philosophy of the Hindus, just as he did towards that of the ancient Greeks. Al-biruni had no successor, but his work must be regarded as one of the great achievements of inter-cultural contact in mediaeval times.
