The trombone is a brass horn musical instrument. It is similar to a trumpet, except the player pushes and pulls on a long part, called the slide, to make sounds. It sounds deeper than a trumpet and is usually said to be one of the bass clef instruments. This is because most people have an easier time playing notes from the bass clef, but some who are good at playing high notes play in the treble clef instead.
History.
The trombone was first used around 1500 AD, during what was called the Renaissance era of music. At that time it was called the sackbut. It was used in many different types of classical music. It is used in almost every brass band in the world today.
Types.
There are a lot of types of trombones, each one is for different playing ranges (how high or low you play). There are contrabass trombones, bass trombones, tenor trombones, alto trombones, soprano trombones, and piccolo trombones. These trombone types are arranged in order from the lowest (contrabass) to the highest (piccolo) sounding trombones. The soprano trombone is also called the slide trumpet.
Bass Trombones.
The bass trombone is a step lower than the starter trombone.(Tenor trombone) By step I mean in musical pitch terms. The reason most people don't start using the bass trombone is because it is a bit more advanced than the starter trombone. One of the main reasons it is harder to use is because most bass's use a series of triggers that lower your pitch. This makes it difficult because it can confuse you with what positions plus the combination of triggers to use. But it also harder to play higher notes that come easily on the tenor trombone. But luckily the Bass trombone is not just a hard instrument to play. It also has very good points too. Most advanced bands will have at least one bass trombone because the bass trombone has a very rich tone and can easily play along in a pitch with the tuba players. Along with being such a low instrument it also gives the musician playing it the ability to use a larger mouthpiece. I cannot specify the exact average dimensions of a bass trombone mouthpiece but i can tell you that, it has a wider shank, (long part that goes into slide) and a larger cup, (part that you put your mouth on). Unfortunately not many people have the courage and will to play the bass trombone, but for those who do i must say you are awesome. As I wrote earlier the bass trombone usually will have a trigger(s). what a trigger does is it can be used as a short cut for positions like in example, playing a C natural in 1st position instead of playing a Bb in first position. This basically lets you use a few short cuts than can really save you some effort when playing a fast song because playing C in 1st is a lot easier tan playing it in 6th. Now that is all i am going to say on the bass trombone, i would normally go into how awesome/amazing they are but apparently wikipedia doesn't like that very much. --Patrick Redmond 747 (talk) 15:52, 17 January 2009 (UTC) Patrick Redmond, the awesome trombone man
