Transpressionism is an artistic movement that appeared in the late 20th century. It is basically a response to statements by the proponents of the post-modern art who had claimed that "art is dead" and that "the end of the painting" had arrived. Guity Novin (Navran) has denounced such a nihilism as a death-trap, because according to her "art is a creative act". Transpressionism was created to affirm art as a creative act, and to celebrate its ability of a perpetual renewal.
Tanspressionnism is projecting an aesthetic sensibility that tends to represent reality in such a way to inspire the viewer's enlightened interpretation of the human tragedy.
The masterpieces of Transpressionism are often based on visions poetic, enigmatic and exquisite legends in order to achieve an artistic expression of the most subliminal. These works of art are the designs of hopes that Transpressionnists present with the help of their mystical perceptions that are tempered by their aesthetic sensitivities. The paintings often use narrative scenes, influenced by the expression of hope in mythological allegories. Interpretation of humanistic values with esoteric concepts aim at aesthetic beauty, harmony and transcendence. The artist's role is to inspire the creative imagination of the observer, where "love" is its fundamental principle that gives meaning to a chaotic and absurd universe.
Origin.
The first declaration of Transpressionnism appeared in 1994, in an Ottawa exhibition of Guity Novin, under the name of Clytie, a Greek nymph who loves the sun-god Apollo and is transformed into sunflower. The art critic Paula Pieault-Stein, in 1997, was the first who has written about "Transpressionnism" in the introduction to the exhibition which was quoted in a news-clip in Globe and Mail, (12 February 1997). According to her "Transpressionism is a movement that goes beyond the paradigms of the impressionism and the expressionism, and awakens us a shrewd insight about the inner world of representation."
