The United States Declaration of Independence is an important document in the history of the United States of America. It was written in 1776 and says that the United States of America are no longer colonies of Great Britain.
Before the Declaration.
Before 1776, the United States of America was not a country. The individual states were colonies of Great Britain. This means that the country of Great Britain ruled the United States. The declaration of independence was signed by 56 men.
Effects.
During this time, many American people were angry at Great Britain. Many Americans did not like paying taxes to Great Britain when they did not have any representation in Parliament. They did not want their lands to be colonies. They wanted America to be a country, so all American people could do what they wanted to do instead of what Great Britain wanted them to do.
Taking action.
Responding to actions taken by Great Britain, including the Intolerable Acts, the different colonies formed a Continental Congress to make decisions for all of the colonies. They met in the American city of Philadelphia. During a meeting of the Second Continental Congress, on June 11, 1776, they named John Adams of Massachusetts, Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania, Thomas Jefferson of Virginia, Robert R. Livingston of New York, and Roger Sherman of Connecticut to form a committee to draft a document that would become the Declaration of Independence.
The Declaration.
Jefferson did most of the writing. Jefferson writes of the rights of people and the role of government. Jefferson then lists specific bad things that the government of Great Britain did. There are many things, for example they put people in jail with no reason, made taxes that were too high, and did not give respect to people who lived in the colony.
What it says.
The Declaration then declares that the colonies are free, independent states.
The Continental Congress approved Jefferson's document. They used his document to declare their independence. Independence was actually declared on July 2, 1776. The full Continential Congress ratified (approved) the Declaration on July 4th, at the Pennsylvania State House. This version was only signed by the President of the Congress John Hancock and the Secretary Charles Thomson. According to legend, John Hancock signed his name very large so that King George could see it without his reading glasses.
Effects on Britain.
They made a new democratic government to govern America. When the king of Great Britain and Parliament heard about this they were angry. Great Britain and the people in America had already been fighting in a war. This war is called the American Revolution. America won the war, and in 1783 Great Britain had to recognize the independence of the new country, the United States, at the Treaty of Paris.
Effects on America.
The people of America like the Declaration of Independence a lot. Every year on the day of July 4, they have a party. They do this to remember the day that Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration, and the day that the United States of America became a country. There are parades, fireworks, and songs.
The Declaration of Independence is also important because it says the simple ideas that the people who made the USA believe. It says that every person has rights (to life, to liberty, and to follow happiness) and that the government has to listen to the people. These things are what makes America a free country.
Present day.
The Declaration of Independence is very old, but it is still here. The paper that Thomas Jefferson used to write his important words is in the National Archives Museum in the American capital of Washington D.C at this very moment. The American Constitution and the Bill of Rights are there as well, hopefully leading our country's leaders in their times of judgement.
