Ultrasound is a type of sound with a frequency bigger than humans can hear. This frequency, the 'upper-limit of human hearing,' is approximately 20,000 (hertz (20 kilohertz).
Ability to hear ultrasound.
Some animals, such as dogs, dolphins, bats, and mice, are able to hear sounds which have a frequency greater than upper-limit of the human ear. This makes them able to hear ultrasounds. Children can hear some high-pitched sounds that older adults cannot hear, as in humans the upper limit pitch of hearing gets lower as a person gets older. This frequency limit is caused by the middle ear that acts as a low-pass filter. If ultrasound is fed directly into the skull bone and reaches the cochlea without passing through the middle ear, much higher frequencies (up to about 200 kHz) can be heard. This effect (sometimes called ultrasonic hearing) was first discovered by divers exposed to a high-frequency (ca. 50 kHz) sonar signal.
Diagnostic sonography.
Medical sonography (ultrasonography) is a useful ultrasound-based diagnostic medical imaging technique used to see muscles, tendons, and many internal organs, their size, structure and any pathological lesions. They are also used to see foetuses during routine and emergency pre-birth care. Ultrasound scans are done by medical health care professionals called 'sonographers.' Obstetric sonography is commonly used during pregnancy. Ultrasound is generally thought of as a "safe test" because it does not use ionising (destructive) radiation like x-rays, nuclear medicine, or CT scans.
Ultrasonic cleaning.
Ultrasonic cleaners are sometimes mistakenly called supersonic cleaners. They are used at frequencies from 20-40 kHz for jewellery, lenses and other optical parts, watches, dental instruments, surgical instruments and industrial parts. An ultrasonic cleaner works by the energy released from the collapse of millions of tiny (microscopic) 'caviations's near the dirty surface. The bubbles formed by cavitation collapse forming small jets directed at the surface.
