The Vietnam War lasted from 1959 to 1975. It was fought between North Vietnam and South Vietnam. North Vietnam was supported by the USSR and China, while South Vietnam was supported by the United States with its allies South Korea, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines. This conflict between communists and pro-American countries was part of the Cold War.
Background and causes.
Before World War II, Vietnam was part of the French colony of Indochina. During World War II, the Japanese occupied Indochina. When the French attempted to reassert control after the Japanese surrendered, they were opposed by a Vietnamese army called the Vietminh. The Vietminh had been founded in 1941 by the communist party and was led by Hồ Chí Minh. In July 1954, France and the Vietminh signed the Geneva Peace Accord. The Vietminh became the government of North Vietnam while anti-communist Vietnamese, especially Catholics, "regrouped" in the South under the leadership of Bao Dai, a former emperor of Vietnam who had abdicated in 1945.
The United States backed the anti-communist government in South Vietnam. It began to send military advisers to help train and support the South Vietnamese army. The South was fighting the Viet Cong, which began a campaign of assassination in 1957. In 1959, North Vietnam dramatically increased its military assistance to the Vietcong, which then began attacking South Vietnamese military units.
Escalation.
The U.S. responded by sending more assistance to South Vietnam as well as sending soldiers called "military advisors." But Soviet support for North Vietnam also increased and the communists forces in the South continued to grow stronger. In 1965, the first United States combat troops entered Vietnam. There would be half a million of them by 1968.
Land battles were fought throughout South Vietnam. Thousands of North Vietnamese Army troops were sent to fight in South Vietnam. There were also thousands of communist soldiers from South Vietnam called Vietcong. Because of this it was often hard for American and South Vietnamese troops to tell friendly civilians from dangerous ones. A tragic example of this mistrust was the My Lai Massacre in March 1968, in which U.S. Army troops killed hundreds of people in a South Vietnamese village. The large number of communist fighters throughout the country meant that American bases were often attacked. In February 1968, Vietcong massacred thousands of South Vietnamese civilians in the city of Hue.
The North Vietnamese and Vietcong were supplied by a vast network of hidden trails, known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Supplies and soldiers from North Vietnam were sent through Laos to communists forces in South Vietnam. America subjected to Ho Chi Minh Trail to extremely heavy bombing and three million bombs were dropped on Laos.
Severe communist loses during the 1968 Tet Offensive made it possible for the U.S. to withdraw many soldiers, a policy called "Vietnamization." South Vietnamese troops were trained and equipped to replace the Americans who left. By 1973, 95 percent of the American troops were gone.
A peace treaty was signed in Paris in January 1973 by all the parties, but fighting continued.
End of U.S involvement and end of the war.
As the war dragged on without result, U.S. public support declined. In June 1973, the U.S. Congress passed legislation banning further U.S. military involvement in Vietnam. This left the communists free to upgrade the Ho Chi Minh Trail and move supplies south without fear of further U.S. bombing. America sent less and less money and weaponry to South Vietnam. South Vietnam continued to fight by itself. North Vietnam launched a massive military attack on South Vietnam in March 1975. The North Vietnamese forces easily defeated the demoralized army of South Vietnam. On April 30, the communists captured Saigon, the capital. North and South Vietnam became a single country again in 1976 called the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
Aftermath.
The communists punished possibly 1 million Vietnamese who had opposed by sending them to "reeducation camps." About 165,000 died in these camps. Many South Vietnamese fled and became "boat people." The United States accepted 823,000 of these while Canada and Australia accepted 137,000 each.
The Vietnam War caused a lot of controversy in the United States. A large scale peace movement demonstrated against the war and conscription. Some student protestors were even killed for protesting.
Many people felt like they were lied to by the United States government about Vietnam due to cover ups about bombings in Cambodia and Laos and the killing of Vietnamese civilians like that of the My Lai Massacre.
The United States used chemical agents such as Agent Orange to destroy crops and jungle areas. The effects of these chemical agents are still felt today in Vietnam.
Somewhere between 2 and 5.7 million people died in the war. Between 365,000 and 587,000 civilians died. Around 58,000 American troops died.
