The vagina is a part of the female human body. Menstrual fluid (red blood-like liquid lost during a monthly period or menstruation) leaves the body through the vagina. During birth, the vagina opens to let the baby through from the uterus for independent life. The vagina is reddish pink in color.
Location.
It is on the lower center of the vulva. It is the tube leading from the uterus (womb) to the outside of the body. The opening is found between both legs, inside the labium, behind the opening to the urethra, a tube leading to the bladder, and in front of the anus, the opening to the rectum.
Anatomy.
The vagina is an elastic, muscular tube starting from the cervix to the vulva. It is about 6 to 7.5 cm (2.5 to 3 in) wide, and 9 cm (3.5 in) long. During sexual intercourse and childbirth, the vagina gets wider and bigger.
The vagina has to be lubricated to stay clean and allow sexual intercourse and childbirth. It is lubricated by the Bartholin's glands. This mucus also allows sperm easier access to fertilize an ovum.
Release.
The vagina releases blood and tissue during menstruation. Tampons can be used to absorb some of the blood.
Sex.
The vagina has lots of nerves, so when a women is aroused, she has a pleasurable sensation sometimes leading to orgasm. Touching the clitoris or G-spot can help lead to an orgasm.
During arousal, the vagina gets up to 8.5 cm (4 in) wider, but can get bigger on more stimulation.
G-spot.
The G-spot is found near the entrance of the vagina. The G-spot, if stimulated, leads to a strong orgasm or female ejaculation. Some researchers deny the existence of the G-spot.
Childbirth.
During birth, the vagina acts as a 'path' for the baby to pass through. The vagina is very elastic and stretches to many times its normal diameter during birth.
Pregnancy.
Sperm needs to be deposited at the top of the vagina near the cervix, or ring of muscle at the entry to the uterus, and fertilize the ovum (egg) if pregnancy is to occur.
In a normal childbirth, babies come out through the vagina.
