Valverde is a province of the Dominican Republic. It is located in the northwestern part of the country. Its capital city is Mao.
It was created on 1959. It was a municipality of the Santiago province before being elevated to the category of province.
Location.
The Valverde province is in the northwest part of the Cibao Valley. It is bordered to the north and the west by the Puerto Plata province, to the east and south by the Santiago province, to the southwest by the Santiago Rodríguez province and to the west by Monte Cristi.
Origin of name.
The province was named Valverde after José Desiderio Valverde, an officer of the Dominican army when the Dominican-Haitian War. Later, he was President of the Dominican Republic for one year (July 1857 - August 1858). He was from Santiago de los Caballeros.
History.
Very few people lived in the lands of the Valverde province because it is very dry; there were only some people raising cattle in large ranches. The Spanish word for those ranches was "Hato" and there are many places in the province with the word "Hato" in their names (Hato del Yaque, Hato Nuevo, Hato Viejo, Hato del Medio) or "Hatico" (small "Hato").
The road from the border with Haiti to Santiago de los Caballeros, the second most important city of the country, went across this region and during the Dominican-Haitian War (1844-1856), Haitian armies came across this region and people did not want to live here.
Since the Dominican Independence, the territory was part of the Santiago province. It was made a province in 1959 with lands of the Santiago and the Monte Cristi provinces.
In 1918, a Belgian engineer, Luis L. Bogaert ("Monsieur Bogaert"), built a canal to take water from the river to the fields and he began to grow rice. That was an important change in the province and now Valverde is a province where rice is an important product.
Municipalities.
The Valverde province has a total area of 823.38 km². It is a small province with only 1.7% of the area of the Dominican Republic and it is ranked as the 28th (out of 31 plus the National District) largest province.
There are three municipalities and ten municipal districts in the province.
Population.
In 2002 (last national census), there were 158,293 people living in the Valverde province, and 114,153 (72.1%) living in towns and cities. The population density was 192.2 persons/km².
Geography.
Most of the province is in a valley along the Yaque del Norte and Mao rivers.
The province is separated from the Puerto Plata province by the "Cordillera Septentrional" mountain range. The highest mountain of the province is in this range: "Loma Jicomé", also called "El Murazo"; it is 1,083 m high.
South of the city of Mao are the "Sierra Samba" (a chain of low hills) and part of the "Cordillera Central" mountain range. The highest mountains of the island are in the Cordillera Central but in the Valverde province there are only low mountains.
There are several important rivers that flow through the territory of the province. The most important river is the Yaque del Norte, that flows from east to west; the other rivers are all tributaries of Yaque del Norte. Other important rivers are Mao and Ámina that come from the Cordillera Central; those rivers that flow from the Cordillera Septentrional are very short and do not have much water.
Economy.
The main economic activity of the province is farming and the main products are banana, plantain, rice and vegetables. Cattle is alto important in the province, mainly in the southern part of it.
Sugar cane was grown around the city Esperanza where there was a sugar factory. But the factory closed and sugar cane is not grown any more. Now there are some cloth factories in Esperanza.
