Victoria, also known as VIC or Vic, is a state in Australia. It is in the south-east corner of the country. Its capital city and largest, most-populated city is Melbourne. Geelong is Victoria's second biggest city, Ballarat is the third and Bendigo the fourth.
Victoria's premier is John Brumby from the ALP (acronym of Australian Labour Party), who recently took over Steve Brack after an unexpected resign.
Victoria has a population of 5,110,500 (2006).
- Floral: Pink Heath
- Aquatic: Weedy Seadragon
- Bird: Helmeted Honeyeater
- Faunal: Leadbeater's Possum
- Colour: Navy
Transport.
Victoria has the highest population density of a state in Australia.
Highways lead to and from population centres, mainly Melbourne and other major cities.
Rail transport in Victoria is common. Major railway line operators include Connex Melbourne, V/Line and Pacific National.
Melbourne Airport is the biggest domestic and international airport for Victoria.
The Port of Melbourne or Port Melbourne is the largest port for cargo in Australia, located in Melbourne near Yarra River. Additional seaports are at Westernport Bay, Geelong, and Portland.
Melbourne.
The city of Melbourne has many attractions, not only its well-known shopping tourism, but other major attractions such as the Crown Casino, Melbourne Zoo, Melbourne Museum, Melbourne Aquarium, Melbourne Docklands, Southbank and St. Kilda. Melbourne is also the home of cultural and sporting icons such as The Arts Centre, National Gallery of Victoria and the Melbourne Cricket Ground, also known as MCG.
Melbourne has also been voted in a poll the world's leading city in sporting.
Other.
The former Goldfields of the historic cities of Ballarat, Beechworth, Bendigo, Castlemaine, Maldon and Daylesford.
Natural attractions include The Twelve Apostles on the Great Ocean Road, Wilson's Promontory, The Grampians, Buchan Caves Gippsland Lakes and the penguins in Phillip Island.
The Dandenong Ranges is also a well-known attraction, in particular Puffing Billy Railway and Healesville Sanctuary.
Waterskiing is popular and draws tourists in towns along the Murray River and Riverina, like Echuca and Mildura.
Geelong, a fast-developing city, has many beaches, and hosts the Australian International Airshow. Not far from Geelong is the Bellarine Peninsula, which has many famous beaches such as Bells Beach, Torquay and Queenscliff.
Mornington Peninsula is said to be the most romantic place in Victoria, mainly because of its wineries and secluded beaches.
The Victorian Alpine Region in the Australian Alps is particularly poular for skiing.
Other popular tourism activities are gliding, hang-gliding, hot air ballooning and scuba diving.
Sport.
Victoria is the home of AFL, with ten of the sixteen clubs of the Australian Football League based in Victoria, and the traditional Grand Final held at the Melbourne Cricket Ground on the last Saturday in September.
Victoria's cricket team, the Victorian Bushrangers play in the national Pura Cup cricket competition.
Victoria has one team each represented in the National Rugby League and the Australian Rugby Championship, the Melbourne Storm and Melbourne Rebels respectively.
