"This article is about the planet Venus. For other uses see here"
Venus is the second planet from the Sun in our Solar System. Venus is a "terrestrial planet" along with Mercury, Earth and Mars because it has a solid surface. Venus has been known by astronmers for thousands of years. The ancient romans named it in honour of their godess Venus. It is the brightest object in the night sky except for the Moon. It is sometimes called the "morning star" or the "evening star" as it is most bright just before morning and night.
Venus is sometimes called the sister planet of Earth as they are quite similar in size and gravity. Apart from that the two planets are very different. Venus' atmosphere or air is made of thick sulphuric acid, and carbon dioxide. Sulphuric acid is a chemical that is very poisonous to humans.
The thick atmosphere has made it hard for people to see the surface of the planet, and until the twenty-first century many people thought things might live on Venus. The pressure on Venus' surface is 92 times that of Earth. Venus has no moons.
Physical Properties.
Venus is a terrestrial planet so, like the Earth, it's surface is made of rock. Venus is much hotter than Earth. All the carbon dioxide in the atmposhere acts like a blanket around the planet, trapping heat from the Sun and causing a runaway greenhouse effect. This makes Venus the hottest planet in the Solar System with an estimated average temperature of 480 degrees. This is hot enough to melt lead.
Geography.
Venus' surface is about 80% smooth, rocky plains. Two higher areas called continents make up the north and south of the planet. The north is called "Ishtar Terra" and the south is called "Aphrodite Terra". They are named after the Babylonian and Greek godesses of love.
Atmosphere.
Venus' atmosphere is mostly carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas with clouds of sulphuric acid. Because the atmosphere is so thick or dense the pressure is very high. The pressure is 92 times the pressure on Earth, enough to crush many things. The average temperature is 480 degrees.
It is impossible to look at the planet's surface from space as the thick cloud layer reflects 60% of the light that hits it. The only way scientists have been able to look is by using infrared and ultraviolet cameras.
