Warcraft is a game series created by Blizzard Entertainment. The series consists of several games including Warcraft to. This game is a Real Time Strategy game where players test their knowledge in strategic warfare to destroy enemies. The most successful game of the series is The Frozen Throne expansion which sold more than 12 million copies. The famous game known to many people as World of Warcraft was based off of these games. Blizzard Entertainment also created World of Warcraft and was published by Vivendi Games.
Objective and information.
The main objective of this real time strategy game is to succeed in eliminating ones enemy. The main races of the game are the mighty Humans, the plagued Undead, the peaceful Night Elves and the rueful Orcs. There are many other branches of races in this game but when playing the other games within this major game, these races are the only ones in which a player can play.
Battle.net.
Battle.net consists of four servers in this game. Azeroth, Northrend, Kalimdor and Lordaeron. This areas represent the different parts of the world in which players play. The closer a player is to each location, the better their connection is to the game. The maximum amount of players per session or also known as "map" is 12. The problem with a game that allows more than 12 players is that it will "lag" the game which is a problem in which Blizzard is tackling.
Azeroth represents US East, Lorderon represents US West, Kailamdor represents Asia and Northerend represents Europe.
The free Battle.net service is mostly used by players as a chat room that can have a maximum of 40 players. There are four types of chatrooms in this program. The public chatrooms that Blizzard made, the private chatrooms in which regular players join, the chatrooms made by clans which always begin with the word Clan followed by up to 4 letters which usually give the acronym for the clan or The Void which is a place in which chat is restricted and where everyone who has been kicked or banned from a channel will go. Players do have the ability to access this area manually.
World Editor.
The World Editor is a program made by Blizzard Entertainment that allows normal players to edit or make their own custom map. This program allows players to use GUI or Jass (a Blizzard made code) to create a map of a players own desire. This has increased the interest of the game because players can now make many different types of maps unlike other games where abilities are extremely limited. On Battle.Net, players can host these games with other players in the custom games section of Battle.net.
Clans and Clan Ranking.
This is the first game On battle.net in which Blizzard Entertainment has a clan system created. Clans must have a minimum of 10 players one including the creator who is the chieftain of the clan. Advisers of the chieftain may be selected after a week of probation time. Their positions are known as shamans. All players except the chieftain will first start out as a peon after they join. After the probation time as stated earlier which is 1 week, they will automatically be turned into grunts which is clearly a higher position than the peon. Before probation time is ended, players have a minimum amount of abilities such as not being able to remove them selves from the clan or other dubious tasks.
Warcraft Battle.net Population.
The daily population of this game varies everyday. Usually on the weekends, the population is larger per day. The population per day on weekends can exceed to up to 100,000 players whereas on weekdays, it can be as low as 60,000.
