The World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) Championship is a professional wrestling world championship in World Wrestling Entertainment. It is the original world title of WWE. Currently, it is the highest ranked championship on the SmackDown brand.
History.
The WWE Championship was originally known as the World Wide Wrestling Federation (WWWF) World Heavyweight Championship. Following the title's introduction in 1963, Buddy Rogers became the first champion on April 29. The World Wide Wrestling Federation joined the NWA in 1971 and was renamed the World Wrestling Federation in 1979. During this time, the title was called the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) Heavyweight Championship. It became known as the WWF World Heavyweight Championship when the promotion left the NWA in 1983. The title began to be called the WWF Championship in 1998.
In March 2001, the World Wrestling Federation purchased World Championship Wrestling. Soon after, "The Invasion" took place in which the ECW Alliance was ultimately dismantled. Following this, it was agreed to unify the title with the WCW Championship at Vengeance 2001. At the event Chris Jericho defeated The Rock and Stone Cold Steve Austin to win the WCW/World Championship and the WWF Championship respectively. As a result, Chris Jericho became the first Undisputed Champion in the World Wrestling Federation.
Following the WWE name change and the WWE Brand Extension, the Undisputed title was defended on the RAW and SmackDown! brands simultaneously while other titles became exclusive to either brand. However, when Brock Lesnar won the Undisputed Championship he was signed to appear and defend the title on the SmackDown! brand only, leaving the RAW brand without a top title. As a result, RAW General Manager, Eric Bischoff, commissioned the World Heavyweight Championship to be the main title for the RAW brand, stating that the Undisputed title was disputed for being defended only on one brand. Immediately afterwards, the title returned to being the WWE Championship.
The WWE Championship remained exclusive to the SmackDown! brand from August 26 2002 until June 6 2005, when the WWE Champion, John Cena, was drafted to the RAW brand during the 2005 WWE Draft Lottery. This left the RAW brand with the two top titles in WWE until the World Heavyweight Champion, Batista, was drafted to the SmackDown! brand on June 30 2005. On June 23, 2008, the WWE Championship was moved back to Smackdown! when Triple H was drafted by Smackdown.
Custom belt designs.
Special custom belts have been created for at least five different champions: "Superstar" Billy Graham (red leather strap), the Ultimate Warrior (white, blue and purple leather straps), "Stone Cold" Steve Austin ("Smokin' Skull" belt), John Cena ("Spinner" belt) and Edge ("Rated R Spinner" belt). A belt with an exceptionally long strap was created for André the Giant before WrestleMania III, however he never wore it as champion. Similarly, Edge had originally designed an entirely different custom belt than the "Rated R Spinner" design he used for his second reign, however the plans were scrapped due to time constraints. The "Spinner" belt's design has since become the WWE Championship's primary design, having also been used by Edge, Rob Van Dam, Randy Orton and Triple H. However since Randy Orton's reign, the WWE logo in the center of the belt is fixed in place and no longer spins.
Current champion.
The current champion is Jeff Hardy who beat Edge for the title at Armageddon 2008 in a match also including Triple H on December 14, 2008. He is in his first reign.
