The Welsh language is the ancient Celtic language of Wales. The language the first language of more than than 20% of the people of Wales (approximately 500,000 people). Many people in Wales understand it, even if they do not speak it all the time. Almost all Welsh people understand and can use English. Children learn it in most schools in Wales. In Welsh it is known as "Cymraeg".
Mutations.
Welsh has mutations. Mutations are when a sound (in speech) or a letter (in writing) changes at the start of a word. An example is the Welsh word gwneud, in English it means "do". Sometimes the word changes from gwneud to wneud. These sound (in speech) or letter (in writing) changes also occur within and at the end of words although the simplified classification found in ordinary books does not mention this.
How to say things in Welsh.
Here are some things to say in Welsh. How to say it in brackets ()
Media.
Welsh books and newspapers have been printed for hundreds of years. Some of these books have been translated into English, and some books in other languages have been translated into Welsh. Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone was translated into a Welsh version called "Harri Potter a Maen yr Athronydd", which means the same thing as the English title.
BBC Radio Cymru is a Welsh-language radio station that is available throughout Wales. Some local radio stations have some Welsh and English programs during the day.
A Welsh television channel, [S4C], has been on air since 1982. It broadcasts shows like the soap opera Pobl y Cwm, and children's programs like Superted and Sam Tân (known as Fireman Sam in English).
The Welsh Alphabet.
A"1", B, C, CH"2", D, DD"2", E"1", F"2", FF"2", G, NG"2", H, I"1", L, LL"2", M, N, O"1", P, PH"2", R, RH"2", S, T, TH"2", U"1", W"1" "2", Y1.
"1" These letters are vowels. The letter W can be used either as a vowel (when it is said 'oo' like in the Welsh word 'cwm' (coom) meaning 'valley') or as a consonant (when it is said like it is in English, for example in the Welsh word 'gwyn' (gwin) meaning 'white'). This is the same with letter I which can also be used as a consonant (when it is said like an English Y like in 'iogwrt' (yog-oort) meaning yoghurt.
"2" Letters that aren't in the English alphabet, or have different sounds. CH sounds like the 'KH' in Ayatollah KHoumeini. DD is said like the TH in 'THere'. F is said like the English 'V'. FF is said like the English 'F'. NG sounds like it would in English but it is tricky because it comes at the beginnings of words (for example 'fy ngardd' - my garden). One trick is to blend it in with the word before it. LL sounds like a cat hissing. PH sounds like the English 'F' too, but it is only used in mutations. RH sounds like an 'R' said very quickly before a 'H'. TH sounds like the 'TH' in 'THin'. W has been explained in the sentences before about vowels.
