Wake County is a county in the U.S. state of North Carolina. As of 2007, the population was 823,345. Wake County has more people than any other county in North Carolina except Mecklenburg County. The county seat is Raleigh, which is also the state capital. Wake County is the 9th fastest growing county in the United States.
Colleges and Universities.
Wake County has seven colleges and universities. They are: Meredith College, North Carolina State University, Peace College, Saint Augustine's College, Shaw University, Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary and Wake Technical Community College.
Public and Private Schools.
The Wake County Public School System runs the public schools in Wake County. The school system has over 134,000 students. There are 20 high schools, 30 middle schools, 93 elementary schools and 8 specialized schools. There are also nine charter schools and 31 private schools in the county.
Transportation.
Raleigh-Durham International Airport is in Wake County. Interstate 40 is a major interstate and part of it goes through the county. Several local bus services have routes throughout Wake County. Wake County also has two Amtrak stations, one in Raleigh and one in Cary.
State parks.
Wake County has three state parks: Falls Lake State Recreation Area, William B. Umstead State Park, and the Jordan Lake State Recreation Area. Falls Lake Park is in northern Wake County and contains the 12,000 acre Falls Lake and 26,000 acres of woods. Umstead Park is between Raleigh and Cary. It has 5,579 acres of woods. Part of Jordan Lake Park, is in Wake County near Apex, and it has the 13,940 acre Jordan Lake and 46,768 acres of woods. This park has bald eagles.
County parks and recreation centers.
There are 152 city parks, public swimming pools and public tennis courts in Wake County. There are 53 community centers. Fifteen miles of the American Tobacco Trail is in the county. People can use the trail to walk, jog, and ride bikes or horses.
Hospitals.
Wake County has three main hospitals, Rex Hospital, WakeMed, and Duke Raleigh Hospital. WakeMed also has many smaller hospitals throughout the county
