William McGonagall (born Edinburgh? 1825?; died Edinburgh, 29 September 1902) was a Scottish poet. He thought he was good at writing poetry, but his poetry was often considered to be the worst poetry in the English language. He became famous because he was such a bad poet.
Life and poetry.
William McGonagall was born in Edinburgh, Scotland. His family were originally Irish. McGonagall worked as a weaver in Dundee.
In 1877, when he was probably 52 years old, he suddenly found that he liked writing poetry. He wrote a poem about a local vicar and sent it to the Dundee Weekly News. The editor thought it was a joke, and he published it as a jokey poem.
McGonagall continued to write poetry. He read his poems in public and lots of people came to hear him. However, his audience had really come to laugh at him and throw rotten vegetables at him.
McGonagall did not seem to realise that people thought his poems were bad. He became disappointed that the town of Dundee did not recognize him as a great poet, so he went to Perth and then to Edinburgh. He continued to write poetry. He travelled to London because he had been given an invitation to meet the famous actor Sir Henry Irvine. However, someone had been playing a trick on him: the invitation was not a real one, and he was not let into the theatre.
McGonagall was teetotal and often spoke against drinking alcohol. He thought that his audiences did not like his poetry because they had been drinking too much.
When he died in 1902 he was a very poor man.
McGonagall in popular culture.
People still remember McGonagall's poems today and continue to make fun of them. The comedian Spike Milligan had a character called McGoonagall in "The Goon Show". One episode of "The Muppet Show" had a character called Angus McGonagle. In the Harry Potter books, author J.K. Rowling chose the surname of the Professor of Transfiguration, Minerva McGonagall, because she had heard of McGonagall and loved the name.
There is a McGonagall Appreciation Society in McGonagall's home town of Dundee.
