Wicca is a religion. It is believed to be based upon the beliefs of ancient peoples who lived in the UK before they all joined the religion of Christianity, but a lot of it was created in the 1940s by a man named Gerald Gardner. The word "wicca" means "witch" in Old English.
The people who practice this religion are called Wiccans. They believe in a God and a Goddess, and they practice a kind of magic. Wiccans have eight big holidays each year, called sabbats. A group of Wiccans who worship and do magic together is a coven. Wiccans often call themselves witches, but not all witches are Wiccan.
Beliefs and practices.
There are a lot of different kinds of Wiccans. Different kinds of Wiccans do different things, but most of them believe in these rules.
God and Goddess.
Most Wiccans believe in a God and a Goddess. Each of these has many different names, which were the original names of ancient gods and goddesses like Athena, Brigid and Isis.
There are some Wiccans, called Dianics, who also believe there is both a Goddess and God but choose to work with only the Goddess.
Magic or magick.
Many Wiccans do magic. Some of them call it "magick," because the K at the end helps them tell which magic is real and which is imaginary (like in a story or "magic tricks" done as a funny show). The use of the spelling "magick" came from the author and occultist Aleister Crowley, whose ideas were influential to the formation of Wicca. They ask their God and Goddess to help change their lives, or the lives of other people. Wiccans say prayers and poems out loud to do magic, or they might burn a candle or some incense. This magic is often called witchcraft, but a person can do witchcraft without being Wiccan.
Altars.
Some Wiccans also put other things on their altars. They might put a statue of their favourite God or Goddess, or a bell, or some candles.
Rules.
One of the most important Wiccan rules is called the "Rede". The word rede means advice. "An harm ye none, do what ye will." This means, "Do what you want to do, but do not harm". The meaning is to think about how your actions will affect not only yourself but the world around you
