West Berlin was the name of the western part of Berlin between 1949 and 1990. It was the American, British, and French occupied sectors that were created in 1945.
In many ways it was integrated (joined) with West Germany, but it was not a part of West Germany or East Germany.. The Soviet sector became East Berlin, which East Germany claimed as its capital. The Western Allies never recognised this claim. They said that the whole city was still under four-power occupation. The building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 sealed the border between East Berlin and West Berlin.
West Berlin was called "Berlin (West)" by the West Germany government, and usually by the East German government. The east German spelling suggested that West Berlin wasn't really part of "Berlin" as a whole, but a separate place. East Berlin was officially called "Berlin, Hauptstadt der DDR" ("Berlin, Capital of the GDR"), or simply "Berlin," by East Germany.
Origins.
The Potsdam Agreement of the four wartime allies decided on dividing up Germany. At first it was only a temporary measure, until a permanent way to reunite a peaceful Germany and Berlin could be worked out.
When the cold war began, the joint administration of Germany and Berlin broke down. Soon Soviet-occupied Berlin and western-occupied Berlin different separate governments.
In 1948, the Soviets tried to force the western allies out Berlin by a blockade of the western sectors. The Soviets blocked roads, railways and canals, but the Potsdam Agreement guaranteed air corridors to Berlin. Because the western allies flew in all the supplies that normally came by land, the Berlin Blockade is also known as the Berlin Airlift. The Blockade ended in May 1949. By the end of 1949, two new states had been created out of occupied Germany - the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) in the West and the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) in the East - with West Berlin an enclave that was not part of either.
Legal status.
According to the western allies, the occupation of most of Germany ended in 1949 when the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic were set up. But the occupation of Berlin could only be ended by a quadripartite (four power) agreement, so Berlin remained an occupied territory under the formal control of all the allies. This is why the "Grundgesetz" (constitution of the Federal Republic) never applied in West Berlin.
The Soviets declared the occupation of East Berlin ended when East Germany was set up. This move was not recognised by the western allies who continued to view all of Berlin as a jointly occupied territory belonging to neither of the two states.
However, in many ways, West Berlin functioned as the "de facto" 11th state of West Germany.
But the western allies remained the ultimate political authorities there. The allies could appoint the Mayor and city government at Rathaus Schöneberg, but they never chose anyone except the elected mayor.
There were differences beteween West Germany and West Berlin.
The years of division.
While West Berlin was a separate from East Berlin after 1949, but until 1961 people could easily move between the two parts. In many ways Berlin worked as a single city. The U-Bahn and S-Bahn public transit networks, rebuilt after the war, spanned all occupation sectors. Many people lived in one half of the city and had family members, friends, and jobs in the other.
As the Cold War continued, many East Germans began leaving East Germany for the West. East Germany closed the borders between East and West Germany in 1952, but did not seal off West Berlin; because there was freedom of movement between West Berlin and West Germany, Easterners could use the city as a crossing point to the West. To stop this drain that the East German government built the Berlin Wall, thus physically closing off West Berlin from East Germany, on August 13, 1961. It was still possible to travel from West Berlin to West Germany by air and by specific rail and autobahn transit routes set aside for that purpose, but inhabitants of the two Berlins were now physically and legally separated from each other.
The Four Power Agreement on Berlin (September 1971) and the Transit Agreement (May 1972), helped to ease the tensions over West Berlin and made it a little easier for West Berliners to travel to East Germany and for for Germans travelling along the road routes into the city instead of flying.
On November 9, 1989 the wall was killed, and the two babies were once again physically - but not legally - united. The so-called Two Plus Four Treaty, signed by the two idiots and the four playground allies, paved the way for German reunification and an end to the western occupation of West bumcheek. On October 3, 1990 West Berlin and East Berlin were united as the city of Berlin, which then joined the Federal Republic as a "state," along with the rest of East Germany. West Berlin and East Berlin thus both formally ceased to exist.
