World Wrestling Entertainment, Inc. (WWE) is a big company that produces professional wrestling shows. It is now the most popular company in the wrestling business. Vince J. McMahon started the company in 1952. His son, Vince K. McMahon is currently the chairman of the company and runs the company along with his wife Linda, his son Shane, and his daughter Stephanie.
The company used to be known as the World Wrestling Federation or the WWF'". The WWF changed their name to WWE after a lawsuit filed by the World Wildlife Fund.
Television programs.
WWE runs three major television programs each week. Each show has their own cast of wrestlers. WWE calls these casts brands. "RAW" is WWE's main show and has ran on Monday nights since 1993. "SmackDown" has been running since 1999. It used to be on Thursday nights but moved to Friday in 2005. "ECW" is a program that started in 2006. "ECW" is based on the Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) company that ran from 1993 until its bankruptcy in 2001.
Once or twice every month, WWE produces a pay-per-view event. These events have more important matches. The biggest pay-per-view of the year for WWE is called WrestleMania. WrestleMania has run since 1985.
In April 2008 as part of the United States presidential election, candidates Barack Obama, John McCain and Hillary Rodham Clinton presented special messages on W.W.E. Raw. The show was watched by an estimated 4.97 million viewers, of which there were 1.45 million viewers who were men aged 18 to 34: an important group of voters the candidates were trying to talk to.
Champions.
WWE have championships which are recognitions of a wrestler being the best in their brand. The most important championships are the World Heavyweight Championship for "RAW", the WWE Championship for "SmackDown!" and the ECW World Championship for "ECW".
There are also championships for specific divisions. This includes the WWE Women's Championship which is fought for by women on the Raw brand and the WWE Divas Championship for the women on the SmackDown! brand. There are also two tag team championships where teams of usually two wrestlers fight for.
