Wind power in Texas consists of many wind farms with a total installed capacity of 5,604 megawatts (MW) from over 40 different projects. Texas produces the most wind power of any U.S. state, followed by California with 2,438 MW. Wind energy accounts for 3.3% of all the energy used in the state and is growing, while large portions of wind energy produced in Texas also goes to markets in other states.
The Horse Hollow Wind Energy Center (735 MW) in Taylor and Nolan counties is the world's largest wind farm. Other large wind farms in Texas include: the Sweetwater Wind Farm, Buffalo Gap Wind Farm, King Mountain Wind Farm, Roscoe Wind Farm, Desert Sky Wind Farm, Wildorado Wind Ranch, and the Brazos Wind Ranch. As of 2007, 942 MW of wind power is currently under construction in Texas. This expansion will help Texas meet its renewable energy goal of 5,000 new megawatts of power from renewable sources by 2015.
Overview.
There are many wind farms in Texas, with a total installed capacity of 2,749 MW (at the end of December 2006), and Texas is firmly established as the leader in wind power development in the USA, ahead of California. As of 2007, 942 MW of wind power is currently under construction in Texas and this expansion will help Texas meet its renewable energy goal of 5,000 new megawatts of power from renewable sources by 2015.
The table below lists the larger wind farms in Texas, currently operating or under construction. Wind farms which are smaller than 80 MW in capacity are not shown.
Texas farmers may lease their land to wind developers for either a set rental per turbine or for a small percentage of gross annual revenue from the project. Although leasing arrangements vary widely, the U. S. Government Accountability Office reported in 2004 that a farmer who leases land to a wind project developer can generally obtain royalties of $3,000 to $5,000 per turbine per year in lease payments. These figures are rising as larger wind turbines are being produced and installed.
The wind power industry is also creating thousands of jobs for communities and for the state. Wind technology and the various aspects of producing electricity from wind power can help to keep employment in Texas after the rigs stop producing oil.
