The object of White blood cells are to stop a person from getting sick. Although germ-fighting are their main goal, they also remove poison, wastes and hurt cells from a person's blood. The different types of white blood cells are: lymphocytes, Monocytes, Neutrophils, Eosinophils and Basophils.
Lymphocytes.
Lymphocytes are round white blood cells a bit bigger than a red blood cell. Their center is round and they have very little cell holding jelly. Part of the lymphatic system, these target specific germs or poisons using their antibodies. There are three known types of lymphocytes, called T-cells, B-cells and Natural Killer cells.
Monocytes.
Monocytes are fat cells with a kidney bean shaped center and lots of cell holding jelly. They may appear in a non-round shape when they pass through tissue (much like a ghost) to literally eat germs, "junk" cells, and dead cells.
The next three types of white blood cells are referred to as granulocytes since they all contain rough, grain-like particles that assist in attacking viruses and bacteria.
Neutrophils.
Neutrophils are really big, round cells with a chubby nucleus, which look like a string of beads. They follow each other like a train. The rough parts can't be recolored for easier seeing, which means the cell holding jelly appears bland when compared to the center. Like monocytes, they actually eat the bad thing they're after. The rough parts contain something called "lysosomal enzymes", which kill germs like soap does on your hands.
Basophils.
Basophils are also big round cells. The chubby center is hidden by rough parts which turn dark blue in color when a scientist recolors them for easier seeing. Basophils release something called a histamine which make bad germs grow bigger until they explode!
Eosinophils.
Eosinophils are round cells with a chubby center and rough parts that turn red when recolored. These cells also eat germs, but only when an antibody tells them to. Eosinophils also shoot cytotoxic enzymes out of those rough parts that attack worms and other bad things that are too big to eat. Eosinophils also attack things that a person is allergic to.
Cell testing.
A special test called a Differential count shows how many white blood cells there are in a person's body, and can also tell a doctor how much of each type are in there. These are used to show what a person's body is currently fighting, if it is figting anything at all.
