World Party Day (P-Day) is celebrated on April 3 as a synchronized global mass celebration of a better world and the creation of desirable reality.
How It Began.
The idea of a coordinated synchronized worldwide party appeared as a work of fiction in the book "Flight, A Quantum Fiction Novel", by American writer Vanna Bonta. In the ending of the book, published in 1995, all people in the world celebrated at the same time.
Worldwide Celebration.
Masses of people grew larger by connecting with groups who shared ideals of peace and goals of using human intelligence and resources toward humanitarian progress.
A massive worldwide phenomenon now in progress involves millions of individuals, organizations and corporations around the world who are realizing a responsibility and ability to contribute positively to the collective future of humanity and Earth.
Social Change.
The internet, media and communication has accelerated one of the biggest social transformations in human history, facilitating the organization of global movements. Research has begun documenting the emerging social transformation of people around the world uniting for a positive, joyful future for humanity, through a common task.
Locations.
Many cities and regions in the United States, France, England, Africa, Italy, China, Korea, Vietnam, India, and Thailand have notable celebrations of World Party Day (P-Day). Radio stations and internet communities spread the event with podcasts of "World Party I."
Simultaneous (at the same time) celebration of World Party Day occurs in every continent of the world, including the Middle East and Africa.
Customs.
The celebration has no religious or political connections. The theme of World Party Day celebrations is a "universal human right to fun, peace and life." The only requirement is to celebrate and party from any place, whether a formal event or private party, large or small, or alone.
Global podcasts in 2007 featured a variety of music, including the African Children's Choir, Hip Hop artists, and radio stations reading from the novel Flight.
Events have been organized as dance parties, concerts, and meditations, however, the only mandatory observance is a synchronized mass awareness of the human right to enjoy life, and displaying hospitality. Some public celebrations organize multi-cultural food and music events.
Since 2000, synchronized global events have escalated, such as The Quadrille Dance Parade, at which in 2007, its 7th year, 24,000 people danced at once. In 2006, 23,600 danced simultaneously in a total of 36 cities.
Petitions circulate to world leaders to officially declare the holiday with the objective of complete world participation every April 3, with everyone in the world having a party in their own way, where ever they are.
