Wonder Woman is a superheroine, who appears in DC Comics. She is the one of the first and most famous superheroes to be female. She first came out in 1941 and was created by William Moulton Marston, a psychologist who believed that women could be strong and powerful as men. Many people think Marston was helped by his wife and based Wonder Woman on his mistress.
Story.
In the comic book, Wonder Woman's real name is Princess Diana and is the daughter of Queen Hippolyta, ruler of the Amazons (a race of female warriors from Greek mythology). She is found by Steve Trevor, a US Air Force pilot, and taken to the United States, where she becomes the superhero Wonder Woman. She has a magic lasso and the bulletproof bracelets, both of which help in fighting villains. She can run very fast and she can fly.
In Other media.
Wonder Woman had also appeared in animated cartoons and in a live-action television program in the 1970s with actress Lynda Carter. The series made the character very famous.
In January 2001, producer Joel Silver asked Todd Alcott to write a "Wonder Woman" screenplay. Early rumors listed actresses such as Mariah Carey, Sandra Bullock, and Catherine Zeta-Jones to play the role of Wonder Woman. Leonard Goldberg, speaking in a May 2001 interview, named Sandra Bullock as a strong candidate for the project. Bullock said that she was asked to play the role. Lucy Lawless and Chyna both were interested in it. The screenplay then went through many versions written by many different writers. By August 2003, Levens was replaced by screenwriter Laeta Kalogridis.
In March 2005, Warner Bros. said that Joss Whedon would write and direct the movie version of "Wonder Woman." Because Whedon was directing "Serenity" at the time, and needed time to learn Wonder Woman's background, he did not start writing until late 2005. Silver wanted to movie "Wonder Woman" in Australia once the script was finished. In May 2005, Whedon said that he would not cast Wonder Woman until he finished the script. Charisma Carpenter and Morena Baccarin said they were interested in the role.
In February 2007, Whedon left the project. He said there were problems with differences about the script between the studio and himself. Whedon said that since he was not doing the "Wonder Woman" project, he would focus on making his film "Goners".
