The Xbox 360 is the second video game console released by Microsoft, after 2001's Xbox. The Xbox 360 competes against the Nintendo Wii and Sony PlayStation 3. All three are called "next-generation" or "seventh generation" consoles. The Xbox 360 was officially revealed on MTV on May 12, 2005.
Development.
Before Microsoft revealed the console's real name, it was called the Xbox 2, Xenon, Xbox Next, NextBox and other names. During the development, Microsoft, said it would launch the "High-Definition" era for video game consoles, promising visuals (looks) that would look better and much more real. The Xbox 360 uses DVDs to play games and other media, although the DVD holds smaller amounts of information in comparison to the "HD DVD" or "Blu-ray".
Release.
It was released in the United States and Canada on November 22, 2005 in Europe on December 2, 2005, and in Japan on December 10, 2005. It was later launched in Malaysia, Mexico, Colombia, South Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Chile, India, Brazil, Poland, Czech Republic, and Russia. When the console was first released in North America, demand was more then the supplies and the console sold out at many stores. Many people sold the console on eBay for higher prices, and it was not until early 2006 that the Xbox 360 became more available in stores again.
Accessories.
A number of accessories can be purchased for the Xbox 360. These include both wired and wireless controllers, custom faceplates that cover the front of the console, headseats for chatting while online,a webcam, a steering wheel for driving games and various other accessories.
Software.
The Xbox 360 is a multimedia console. It can play music and videos streamed or downloaded from a computer. It can also play DVDs and for a short time it could play HD DVDs. The main feature of the console is its unique dashboard.
Updates.
The recent NXE (New Xbox Experience) has loads of new feature to use. Including a new avatar feature which is customisable to look like yourself. A new look on the dashboard with easily accessible sections. The new NXE shows all your friends and what there doing at that time. Another new feature is the ability to add people to an Xbox live Party. This is where you can invite other friends to be involved in a big chat. It doesn't matter if your on the dashboard or playing another game up to seve of your friends anyone can join. Another Options it to add friends to the party and game. Which will invite them to the game your playing and the Party your in.
