Zanzibar is the name for an archipelago in the Indian Ocean 25–50 km off the coast of East Africa, of numerous small islands and two large ones: Unguja (the main island, sometimes informally referred to as 'Zanzibar'), and Pemba Island. The archipelago was once the separate state of Zanzibar, which united with Tanganyika to form Tanzania (derived from the two names), and still enjoys a high degree of autonomy within the union. The capital of Zanzibar, located on the island of Unguja, is Zanzibar City. The city's old quarter, known as Stone Town, is a World Heritage Site.
Zanzibar's main industries are spices (which include cloves, nutmeg, cinnamon and pepper), raffia, and tourism. Zanzibar is also the home of the endemic Zanzibar Red Colobus and the elusive Zanzibar Leopard.
The word "Zanzibar" probably derives from the Persian زنگبار, "Zangi-bar" ("coast of the blacks") and it is also known as Zanji-bar in Arabic. "Zanzibar" may also refer to the spice ginger (genus "Zingiber"). Zanzibar is sometimes referred to as the "Spice Islands," a term that is also associated with the Maluku Islands in Indonesia. Pemba Island is the only island apart from Zanzibar that still produces cloves on a major basis which is the primary source of spice income for the islands.
Zanzibar gained independence on 10th December 1963 from British, although official the independence date is not recognised, it was the first time this year a group of people organized the celebration which was condemned by the President of Zanzibar during the celebration of Zanzibar revolution.
Zanzibar was also the first country to introduced colour television in Africa as a gift for the first president of Zanzibar Karume Snr, but it is believed that it is the last in Africa in term of Good service, according to the website of Zanzibar State Television TVZ,most of its poor production said to be influenced by the ruling Party, and lack of experience staffs because of poor payment.
There are many political parties in Zanzibar but the main Parties are CCM the ruling party and CUF known as Chama cha wananchi, the party's name has far been associated as the Swahili translation of CIVIC UNITE FRONT and has been known by many although it has different meanings. Chama cha wananchi means Peoples Party in English and not Civic united front as many think.
These two main parties have been sat for 2 years reconciliation which broke after each party accused others for breaking the rule.
Zanzibaris are living in very tough life compare to mainland, one of the reason is because most of the House of Representative members are discussing politics rather then development, unlike mainland where there all members of parliaments care about the people who elected them and work hard to ensure they are re-elected, but in Zanzibar because of the division of the people in politics no one shows any motivation knowing that whether they work hard or not, they will be elected because Zanzibaris take politics as a football games competition.
What surprises many is that all candidates instead of initiative some thing which will either create jobs for the people or improve life, they always discuss about bringing water and electricity which are the must things to be done in life and not as a campaign.
