Zeno's Paradoxes are a famous set of thought-provoking stories or puzzles created by Zeno of Elea in the mid-5th century B.C. Philosophers, physicists, and mathemeticians have argued over how to answer the questions raised by Zeno's Paradoxes for two and a half millennia. Although the specifics of each paradox differ from one another, they all deal with the tension between the apparent continuous nature of the universe and the discrete or incremental nature of mathematics and physics.
A Most Ingenious Paradox.
The most famous of Zeno's Paradoxes is called The Tortoise and Achilles. The story goes that if Achilles (the famous hero from The Iliad) were to race a tortoise, but the tortoise were given a head start, Achilles would never catch the tortoise no matter how fast or how long Achilles ran. This is of course nonsense, because common sense and observation tell us that there is no paradox here- Achilles will eventually catch up with and pass the tortoise. However, the paradox lies upon a purely mathematical inspection of this scenario.
In order for Achilles to catch the tortoise, he must of course cover some distance A between where he began the race and where the reptilian racer began as well. However, in the time Achilles traversed A, the shelled shlepper traveled a second distance B. Of course Achilles is undaunted, because B is less than A, and brings himself to the point where he has gone the distance A + B. To the champion's chagrine, the tortoise has not yet given up, and in the time Achilles took to cover B, has continued to travel C. This progression can be carried out ad infinitum, and it can be shown that, mathematically speaking, there is an infinite number of time intervals and/or distances which Achilles must endure to catch his intrepid opponent.
1. There is something wrong with the way we perceive the continuous nature of time,
2. In reality there is no such thing as a discrete, or incremental, amounts of time, distance, or perhaps anything else for that matter, or
3. There is a third picture of reality that unifies the two pictures- the common sense or philosophical one, and the mathematical one- that we do not yet have the tools to fully understand.
A Most Famous Paradox.
Suppose someone wishes to get from point A to point B. Well, first they must move halfway. Then, they must walk halfway again. And so forth, never actually reaching the ending. So, motion from any point A to any different point B is impossible. A common response to such a problem is to point at calculus: we can add up infinite series like 1+1/2+1/4+1/8+1/16... to get 2. However, the basic question Zeno is asking is how one can deal with an infinite progression with doing each element individually. Using calculus does not actually involve adding up infinite numbers one number at a time. Instead, it adds up a large group of numbers all at once. The quantum physicists respond to this paradox by saying that Zeno's premise was incorrect. That is, it is not always necessary that for a point A and a point B, one must go halfway between them before getting to point B.
