Ćevapčići or Ćevapi () in some regions, is a dish made of grilled meat. It ocmes from the Balkans. It originally is of oriental origin. It can be found in the countries of the Former Yugoslavia. Ćevapčići are served on a plate or in a flatbread ("lepinja" or "somun"). Chopped onions, sour cream, kajmak, ajvar, cottage cheese, and similar sauces are often added.
Serbian "ćevapčići" from Leskovac are made of beef (usually of three mixed types of cuts) and served on a plate with a "lepinja". The traditional, and preferred, way of grilling "ćevapčići" is to use glowing coals beneath a grill. Both expressions "ćevapčići" and "ćevapi" are common in Serbia. In Belgrade, from where ćevapčići spread all over the world, this is the only traditional expression. In other parts of Serbia "ćevapčići" are often made of both pork and beef. Although "ćevapčići" is a formal diminutive, ćevapčići from Leskovac are longer (10-12 cm) than Bosnian ćevapi (5-8 cm). The Leskovac-recipe was the one that became popular in Belgrade during the 19th century and then spread all over Yugoslavia, Europe and United States.
Bosnian "ćevapi" from the Baščaršija district of Sarajevo and Banja Luka are probably the most famous "ćevapi". Travnik and Tuzla are known for their ćevapi made of beef stewed with spices. This dish is very popular in some parts of former Yugoslavia as well. The stew is poured on "lepinja" or "somun" flatbread and few chunks of meat left there. Banja Luka is known for ćevapi which are multiple rolls (usually four) joined together. Bosnian ćevapi are made from two types of minced beef meat, hand mixed and formed with a funnel. Formed ćevapi are grilled.
Macedonian "kebapi" (ќебапи) are made of both pork and beef. A serving usually consists of 5-10 pieces, served with white bread, minced red pepper, salt and onions.
In Romania, the Ćevapčići are called Mititei.
Etymology.
The word comes from the Arabic "kebab", sometimes with the South Slavic diminutive ending "-čići" (Serbian: Ћевапчићи/Ћевапи, "ćevapčići/ćevapi"; Macedonian: Ќебапи, "ćebapi"; Slovenian: "čevapčiči"), Croatian and Bosnian: "ćevapčići/ćevapi"). For more on the word's history, see the etymology section of "kebab".
