
 is the Latin name under which the "Lamb of God" is honoured within the Roman Catholic Mass and, by extension, other Christian liturgies descending from the Latin tradition. It is the name given to a specific prayer that occurs in these liturgies, and is the name given to the music pieces that accompany the text of this prayer.
The use of the title "Lamb of God" in liturgy is based on , in which St. John the Baptist, upon seeing Jesus, proclaims "Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!"
Liturgical usage.
Roman Catholic.
The Syrian custom of a chant addressed to the Lamb of God was introduced into the Roman Rite Mass by Pope Sergius I (687–701) in the context of his rejection of the Council of Trullo of 692 (which was well-received in the Byzantine East), whose canons had forbidden the iconographic depiction of Christ as a lamb instead of a man.
The verse used in the first and second invocations may be repeated as many times as necessary.
In a Tridentine Requiem Mass, the words " are replaced by " (grant them rest), while " is replaced by " (grant them eternal rest).
The priest uses the phrase "Lamb of God" again, later in the Mass. While displaying the Eucharistic species to the people before giving them Holy Communion, he says: "" ("Behold the Lamb of God, behold Him who takes away the sins of the world. Blessed are those called to the supper of the Lamb.")
Anglican.
The following three versions are all found in the Church of England's "Common Worship" liturgical resources, and also in the Episcopal Church's liturgical resources:
Lutheran.
The version found in the Lutheran Service Book of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod is:
Musical settings.
Religious music.
Virtually every Mass setting (of which there are thousands) includes an . Here are some examples:
With a slightly changed text, the is also part of musical settings composed for the Requiem Mass for the Dead. Such settings include:
Some composers set the text as an independent movement, such as Samuel Barber, who wrote a version combining the text with the music of his "Adagio for Strings", sung a cappella.
In popular culture.
Outside of religious use, the text has been used by composers such as:

