
The active laser medium (also called gain medium or lasing medium) is the source of optical gain within a laser. The gain results from the stimulated emission of photons through electronic or molecular transitions to a lower energy state from a higher energy state previously populated by a pump source.
Examples of active laser media include:
In order to fire a laser, the active gain medium must be in a nonthermal energy distribution known as a population inversion. The preparation of this state requires an external energy source and is known as laser pumping. Pumping may be achieved with electrical currents (e.g. semiconductors, or gases via high-voltage discharges) or with light, generated by discharge lamps or by other lasers (semiconductor lasers). More exotic gain media can be pumped by chemical reactions, nuclear fission, or with high-energy electron beams.
Example of a model of gain medium.
A universal model valid for all laser types does not exist. 
The simplest model includes two systems of sub-levels: upper and lower. Within each sub-level system, the fast transitions ensure that thermal equilibrium is reached quickly, leading to the Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics of excitations among sub-levels in each system "(fig.1)". The upper level is assumed to be metastable. Also, gain and refractive index are assumed independent of a particular way of excitation.
For good performance of the gain medium, the separation between sub-levels should be larger than working temperature; then, at pump frequency formula_1, the absorption dominates.
In the case of amplification of optical signals, the lasing frequency is called "signal frequency." However, the same term is used even in the laser oscillators, when amplified radiation is used to transfer energy rather than information. The model below seems to work well for most optically-pumped solid-state lasers.
Cross-sections.
The simple medium can be characterized with effective cross-sections of absorption and emission at frequencies formula_2 and formula_3.
The relative concentrations can be defined as formula_8 and formula_9.
The rate of transitions of an active center from ground state to the excited state can be expressed with formula_10 and
The rate of transitions back to the ground state can be expressed with formula_11,
where formula_12 and formula_13 are effective cross-sections of absorption at the frequencies of the signal and the pump.
formula_14 and formula_15 are the same for stimulated emission;
formula_16 is rate of the spontaneous decay of the upper level.
Then, the kinetic equation for relative populations can be written as follows:
formula_17
The dynamic saturation intensities can be defined:
formula_18,
formula_19.
The absorption at strong signal:
formula_20.
The gain at strong pump:
formula_21,
where formula_22
is determinant of cross-section.
Gain never exceeds value formula_23, and absorption never exceeds value formula_24.
At given intensities formula_25, formula_26 of pump and signal, the gain and absorption
can be expressed as follows:
formula_27,
formula_28,
where 
formula_29, 
formula_30, 
formula_31, 
formula_32 .
Identities.
The following identities take place:
formula_33, formula_34
The state of gain medium can be characterized with a single parameter, such as population of the upper level, gain or absorption.
Efficiency of the gain medium.
The efficiency of a gain medium can be defined as
formula_35.
Within the same model, the efficiency can be expressed as follows:
formula_36.
For the efficient operation both intensities, pump and signal should exceed their saturation intensities;
formula_37, and formula_38.
The estimates above are valid for a medium uniformly filled with pump and signal light. Spatial hole burning may slightly reduce the efficiency because some regions are pumped well, but the pump is not efficiently withdrawn by the signal in the nodes of the interference of counter-propagating waves.

