
In literary criticism, a Bildungsroman (, plural Bildungsromane, ) is a literary genre that focuses on the psychological and moral growth of the protagonist from youth to adulthood (coming of age), in which character change is important. The term comes from the German words "Bildung" ("education") and "Roman" ("novel").
Origin.
The term was coined in 1819 by philologist Karl Morgenstern in his university lectures, and was later famously reprised by Wilhelm Dilthey, who legitimized it in 1870 and popularized it in 1905. The genre is further characterized by a number of formal, topical, and thematic features. The term "coming-of-age novel" is sometimes used interchangeably with "Bildungsroman", but its use is usually wider and less technical.
The birth of the Bildungsroman is normally dated to the publication of "Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship" by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe in 1795–96, or, sometimes, to Christoph Martin Wieland's "Geschichte des Agathon" of 1767. Although the "Bildungsroman" arose in Germany, it has had extensive influence first in Europe and later throughout the world. Thomas Carlyle translated Goethe's novel into English, and after its publication in 1824, many British authors wrote novels inspired by it. In the 20th century, it spread to Germany, Britain, France, and several other countries around the globe.
The genre translates fairly directly into the cinematic form, the coming-of-age film.
Plot outline.
A "Bildungsroman" relates the growing up or "coming of age" of a sensitive person who goes in search of answers to life's questions with the expectation that these will result in gaining experience of the world. The genre evolved from folklore tales of a dunce or youngest child going out in the world to seek his fortune. Usually in the beginning of the story there is an emotional loss which makes the protagonist leave on his or her journey. In a "Bildungsroman", the goal is maturity, and the protagonist achieves it gradually and with difficulty. The genre often features a main conflict between the main character and society. Typically, the values of society are gradually accepted by the protagonist and he or she is ultimately accepted into society—the protagonist's mistakes and disappointments are over. In some works, the protagonist is able to reach out and help others after having achieved maturity.
Franco Moretti "argues that the main conflict in the "Bildungsroman" is the myth of modernity with its overvaluation of youth and progress as it clashes with the static teleological vision of happiness and reconciliation found in the endings of Goethe's "Wilhelm Meister" and even Jane Austen's "Pride and Prejudice"".
There are many variations and subgenres of "Bildungsroman" that focus on the growth of an individual. An "Entwicklungsroman" ("development novel") is a story of general growth rather than self-cultivation. An "Erziehungsroman" ("education novel") focuses on training and formal schooling, while a "Künstlerroman" ("artist novel") is about the development of an artist and shows a growth of the self. Furthermore, some memoirs and published journals can be regarded as "Bildungsroman" although being predominantly factual (e.g. "The Dharma Bums" by Jack Kerouac or" The Motorcycle Diaries" by Ernesto "Che" Guevara). The term is also more loosely used to describe coming-of-age films and related works in other genres.

