
Berinthia "Berry" Berenson-Perkins ( Berenson; April 14, 1948 – September 11, 2001) was an American photographer, actress, and model. Berenson, who was married to actor Anthony Perkins from 1973 until his death in 1992, died in the September 11 attacks as a passenger on American Airlines Flight 11.
Early life.
Berry Berenson was born in Murray Hill, Manhattan, New York City. Her mother was born Maria-Luisa Yvonne Radha de Wendt de Kerlor, better known as Gogo Schiaparelli, a socialite of Italian, Swiss, French, and Egyptian ancestry. Her father, Robert Lawrence Berenson, was an American career diplomat turned shipping executive; he was of Lithuanian-Jewish descent, and his family's original surname was "Valvrojenski".
Berenson's maternal grandmother was the Italian-born fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli, and her maternal grandfather was Wilhelm de Wendt de Kerlor, a Theosophist and psychic medium. Her elder sister, Marisa Berenson, became a well-known model and actress. She also was a great-grandniece of Giovanni Schiaparelli, an Italian astronomer who believed he had discovered the supposed canals of Mars, and a second cousin, once removed, of art expert Bernard Berenson (1865–1959) and his sister Senda Berenson (1868–1954), an athlete and educator who was one of the first two women elected to the Basketball Hall of Fame.
Career.
Following a brief modeling career in the late 1960s, Berenson became a freelance photographer. By 1973, her photographs had been published in "Life", "Glamour", "Vogue" and "Newsweek".
Berenson studied acting at New York's The American Place Theatre with Wynn Handman along with Richard Gere, Philip Anglim, Penelope Milford, Robert Ozn, Ingrid Boulting and her sister Marisa.
Berenson also appeared in several motion pictures. She starred opposite Anthony Perkins in the 1978 Alan Rudolph film "Remember My Name", and appeared with Jeff Bridges in the 1979 film "Winter Kills" and Malcolm McDowell in "Cat People" (1982).
Personal life and death.
On August 9, 1973, in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, Berenson, three months pregnant, married her future "Remember My Name" co-star Anthony Perkins. The couple raised two sons: actor-director Oz Perkins (born 1974) and folk/rock singer-songwriter Elvis Perkins (born 1976). They remained married until Perkins's death from AIDS-related complications on September 12, 1992.
Berenson died at age 53 in the September 11 attacks aboard American Airlines Flight 11. She was returning to her Los Angeles home, following a holiday on Cape Cod.
At the National September 11 Memorial &amp; Museum, Berenson is memorialized at the North Pool, on Panel N-76.

