
In mathematics, a binary function (also called bivariate function, or function of two variables) is a function that takes two inputs.
Precisely stated, a function formula_1 is binary if there exists sets formula_2 such that
where formula_4 is the Cartesian product of formula_5 and formula_6
Alternative definitions.
Set-theoretically, a binary function can be represented as a subset of the Cartesian product formula_7, where formula_8 belongs to the subset if and only if formula_9.
Conversely, a subset formula_10 defines a binary function if and only if for any formula_11 and formula_12, there exists a unique formula_13 such that formula_8 belongs to formula_10.
formula_16 is then defined to be this formula_17.
Alternatively, a binary function may be interpreted as simply a function from formula_4 to formula_19.
Even when thought of this way, however, one generally writes formula_16 instead of formula_21.
Examples.
Division of whole numbers can be thought of as a function. If formula_22 is the set of integers, formula_23 is the set of natural numbers (except for zero), and formula_24 is the set of rational numbers, then division is a binary function formula_25.
Another example is that of inner products, or more generally functions of the form formula_26, where , are real-valued vectors of appropriate size and is a matrix. If is a positive definite matrix, this yields an inner product.
Functions of two real variables.
Functions whose domain is a subset of formula_27 are often also called functions of two variables even if their domain does not form a rectangle and thus the cartesian product of two sets.
Restrictions to ordinary functions.
In turn, one can also derive ordinary functions of one variable from a binary function.
Given any element formula_11, there is a function formula_29, or formula_30, from formula_31 to formula_19, given by formula_33.
Similarly, given any element formula_12, there is a function formula_35, or formula_36, from formula_5 to formula_19, given by formula_39. In computer science, this identification between a function from formula_4 to formula_19 and a function from formula_5 to formula_43, where formula_43 is the set of all functions from formula_31 to formula_19, is called "currying".
Generalisations.
The various concepts relating to functions can also be generalised to binary functions.
For example, the division example above is "surjective" (or "onto") because every rational number may be expressed as a quotient of an integer and a natural number.
This example is "injective" in each input separately, because the functions "f" "x" and "f" "y" are always injective.
However, it's not injective in both variables simultaneously, because (for example) "f" (2,4) = "f" (1,2).
One can also consider "partial" binary functions, which may be defined only for certain values of the inputs.
For example, the division example above may also be interpreted as a partial binary function from Z and N to Q, where N is the set of all natural numbers, including zero.
But this function is undefined when the second input is zero.
A binary operation is a binary function where the sets "X", "Y", and "Z" are all equal; binary operations are often used to define algebraic structures.
In linear algebra, a bilinear transformation is a binary function where the sets "X", "Y", and "Z" are all vector spaces and the derived functions "f" "x" and "f""y" are all linear transformations.
A bilinear transformation, like any binary function, can be interpreted as a function from "X" × "Y" to "Z", but this function in general won't be linear.
However, the bilinear transformation can also be interpreted as a single linear transformation from the tensor product formula_47 to "Z".
Generalisations to ternary and other functions.
The concept of binary function generalises to "ternary" (or "3-ary") "function", "quaternary" (or "4-ary") "function", or more generally to "n-ary function" for any natural number "n".
A "0-ary function" to "Z" is simply given by an element of "Z".
One can also define an "A-ary function" where "A" is any set; there is one input for each element of "A".
Category theory.
In category theory, "n"-ary functions generalise to "n"-ary morphisms in a multicategory.
The interpretation of an "n"-ary morphism as an ordinary morphisms whose domain is some sort of product of the domains of the original "n"-ary morphism will work in a monoidal category.
The construction of the derived morphisms of one variable will work in a closed monoidal category.
The category of sets is closed monoidal, but so is the category of vector spaces, giving the notion of bilinear transformation above.

