
BI Norwegian Business School () is the largest business school in Norway and the second largest in all of Europe. BI has in total four campuses with the main one located in Oslo. The university has 845 employees consisting of an academic staff of 404 people and 441 administrative staff. In 2015, BI Norwegian Business School had 18,728 students. BI is the largest supplier of economic and administrative competence and skills in Norway with more than 200,000 graduates since 1983. BI Norwegian Business School is a private foundation and is accredited by NOKUT as a specialised university institution. BI organised its academic activities in nine separate research departments covering all of the disciplines that can be expected at a modern European business school.
History.
BI Norwegian Business School was founded in 1943 by Finn Øien as "Bedriftøkonomisk Institutt" (), hence the abbreviation "BI".
Current activities.
BI offers a full set of programs for bachelor, master, and doctoral degrees, as well as executive education and tailor-made programs for businesses. The teaching languages are English (BBA and graduate programs) and Norwegian (majority of undergraduate programs and custom programs for local businesses). The school currently participates in exchange programs with 200 foreign institutions in 45 countries.
The internationally award-winning main campus in Nydalen (Oslo) was designed by Niels Torp, who also designed Gardermoen Airport.
Norsk Kundebarometer.
Norsk Kundebarometer (NKB) () is a research program run by BI, with a focus on relations between customers and businesses. Based on an annual survey of Norwegian households, it collects data that may be used for comparison between businesses, comparisons between various industries, and comparisons over time.
Activities abroad.
BI has educated roughly 1700 students in China through its close relationship with Fudan University in Shanghai, and is also the majority shareholder of the ISM University of Management and Economics (previously known as International School of Management) with around 1800 students located in Vilnius and Kaunas in Lithuania.
Degree programs.
Undergraduate (All taught in Norwegian except Business Administration and Business Analytics)
Graduate (All taught in English, except MSc in Accounting &amp; Auditing and MSc in Law &amp; Business)
Executive MBA (EMBA general management in cooperation with Nanyang Business School (Nanyang Technological University), Singapore and Instituto de Empresa in Madrid, Spain and Haas School of Business (University of California at Berkeley), USA)
Student organizations.
The school has two student organizations, one for the main campus in Oslo and one for the other campuses. The Oslo student organization is called "" (SBIO) (). This union was formed in 2005 after the relocation of the three locations in Oslo into one—Nydalen Campus. The three previous unions were called Bedriftøkonomisk Studentersamfund (BS), BISON and MØSS. BS was the oldest union, formed in 1964. The union for the other campuses is "BI Studentsamfunn" (BIS) (). This union was founded on 7 February 1987 and is today the largest student union of a private school in Norway. As of June 2019, the two student organizations have decided to merge into one student body, the name and other details of which will be decided over the summer of 2019.
The student newspaper is named "INSIDE", and its circulation is 11,000.
The all-male student choir is named UFDA The Choir Boys and was established in 1986.
Ranking.
BI is currently ranked 49th in the Financial Times ranking of European Business Schools.
In 2009, BI was ranked by Eduniversal as the 35th most influential business school in the world.
Quality accreditations.
BI is accredited as a specialised university institution by the Norwegian Agency for Quality Assurance in Education (NOKUT).
BI has also received the following recognitions from private institutions:
External links.
 

