
Clodius is an alternate form of the Roman "nomen" Claudius, a patrician "gens" that was traditionally regarded as Sabine in origin. The alternation of "o" and "au" is characteristic of the Sabine dialect. The feminine form is Clodia.
Republican era.
Publius Clodius Pulcher.
During the Late Republic, the spelling "Clodius" is most prominently associated with Publius Clodius Pulcher, a popularis politician who gave up his patrician status through an order in order to qualify for the office of tribune of the "plebs". Clodius positioned himself as a champion of the urban "plebs", supporting free grain for the poor and the right of association in guilds ("collegia"); because of this individual's ideology, "Clodius" has often been taken as a more "plebeian" spelling and a gesture of political solidarity. Clodius's two elder brothers, the Appius Claudius Pulcher who was consul in 54 BC and the C. Claudius Pulcher who was praetor in 56 BC, conducted more conventional political careers and are referred to in contemporary sources with the traditional spelling.
The view that "Clodius" represents a plebeian or politicized form has been questioned by Clodius's chief modern-era biographer. In "The Patrician Tribune", W. Jeffrey Tatum points out that the spelling is also associated with Clodius's sisters and that "the political explanation … is almost certainly wrong." A plebeian branch of the "gens", the Claudii Marcelli, retained the supposedly patrician spelling, while there is some inscriptional evidence that the "-o-" form may also have been used on occasion by close male relatives of the "patrician tribune" Clodius. Tatum argues that the use of "-o-" by the "chic" Clodia was a fashionable affectation, and that Clodius, whose perhaps inordinately loving relationship with his sister was the subject of much gossip and insinuation, was imitating his stylish sibling. The linguistic variation of "o" for "au" was characteristic of the Umbrian language, of which Sabine was a branch. Forms using "o" were considered archaic or rustic in the 50s BC, and the use of "Clodius" would have been either a whimsical gesture of pastoral fantasy, or a trendy assertion of antiquarian authenticity.
Other Clodii of the Republic.
In addition to Clodius, Clodii from the Republican era include:
Women of the Claudii Marcelli branch were often called "Clodia" in the late Republic.
Imperial era.
People using the name "Clodius" during the period of the Roman Empire include:
Clodii Celsini.
The Clodii Celsini continued to practice the traditional religions of antiquity in the face of Christian hegemony through at least the 4th century, when Clodius Celsinus Adelphius (see below) converted. Members of this branch include:

