
Charles McCarry (June 14, 1930 – February 26, 2019) was an American writer, primarily of spy fiction, and a former undercover operative for the Central Intelligence Agency whom "The Wall Street Journal" described in 2013 as "the dean of American spy writers"; "The New Republic" magazine calls him "poet laureate of the CIA"; and Otto Penzler says he has produced some "poetic masterpieces". William Zinsser calls him a "political novelist". Jonathan Yardley, Pulitzer Prize-winning critic for the "Washington Post", calls him a "'serious' novelist" whose work may include "the best novel ever written about life in high-stakes Washington, D.C." P. J. O'Rourke called him "the best modern writer on the subject of intrigue." O'Rourke learned about McCarry from a working covert operative who called McCarry "very realistic."
Early life.
His family came from The Berkshires area of western Massachusetts. McCarry was born in Pittsfield, and he lived in Virginia.
Approach to writing.
McCarry believed that "the best novels are about ordinary things: love, betrayal, death, trust, loneliness, marriage, fatherhood." He also said "if you write a political novel, you're writing what you believe instead of what you know."
McCarry said, "the themes of my novels have been ordinary things – love, death, betrayal and the American dream."
In a 1988 essay published in the "Washington Post", McCarry wrote, "[I]n 1973 when I turned in the manuscript of my novel "The Tears of Autumn", [the publisher] summoned me to New York and, in his office high above lower Park Avenue, banged the manuscript on his desk. 'This book is talky, it's slow, and nobody is going to believe a goddamn word of the plot,' he said. 'Where's the car chase? Where's the torture scene? Where's the sex? Where's the good Russian? Do you call this a thriller?' 'No,' I said. He didn't hear me."
McCarry wrote that: "After I resigned [from the CIA], intending to spend the rest of my life writing fiction and knowing what tricks the mind can play when the gates are thrown wide open, as they are by the act of writing, between the imagination and that part of the brain in which information is stored, I took the precaution of writing a closely remembered narrative of my clandestine experiences. After correcting the manuscript, I burned it. What I kept for my own use was the atmosphere of secret life: How it worked on the five senses and what it did to the heart and mind. All the rest went up in flames, setting me free henceforth to make it all up. In all important matters, such as the creation of characters and the invention of plots, with rare and minor exceptions, that is what I have done. And, as might be expected, when I have been weak enough to use something that really happened as an episode in a novel, it is that piece of scrap, buried in a landfill of the imaginary, readers invariably refuse to believe."
Throughout McCarry's fiction are statements and descriptions such as "the average intelligence officer is a sort of latter-day Marcel Proust. He lies abed in a cork-lined room, hoping to profit by secrets that other people slip under the door."
Snippets from McCarry's CIA years can be found in his non-fiction writing for newspapers. For example, "In the early days of the cold war, a colleague of mine who had worked his way through college playing the saxophone was recruited by a certain United States intelligence agency. For his first assignment, he was posted to Cambodia and told to find an apartment near the royal palace, open the windows at night, and play “Muskrat Ramble.” Prince Sihanouk, the eccentric ruler of the country, was reputed to be an amateur musician who loved jazz and had his own band. Who knew but what he might hear that plaintive sax in the jungle night and invite the nice young American to come on over and sit in?"
A critic for "Tin House" magazine approaches McCarry through what the critic calls "the art of the sentence," citing as an example a description in the opening pages of McCarry's "The Secret Lovers": "The sun shone feebly through the overcast, like a lamp covered by a woman's scarf in a shabby hotel room."
A recurrent statement found in McCarry's non-fiction writing is that events in real life are so strange that if presented as fiction no one would believe them.
McCarry's novels were all republished in 2005—which means major critics revisited his work—some of which was more than a third-of-a-century old. Rereading "The Tears of Autumn", one critic called it "a perfect spy novel."
Regrets.
McCarry said in 1995, "If I had to do it over again, I would have written novels about a pediatrician, anonymously." Why? Because he thinks of himself as a novelist, not a writer of spy fiction. And yet, almost all of his novels—including the non-Paul Christopher books—have a strong focus on espionage.
Career.
Military, U.S. presidential speechwriter, CIA.
McCarry began his writing career in the United States Army as a correspondent for "Stars and Stripes". Afterwards, in the 1950s, serving as a speechwriter in the early Administration of President Dwight D. Eisenhower; a typical McCarry item was the 1953 Labor Day Proclamation, which read, in part, "Free American labor has won for itself the enjoyment of a standard of living unmatched in history. The contemporary world knows no comparison with it. There is only brutal contrast to it. To this, there is no more pitiful and dramatic testimony than the food which this free people has been able to send to feed hundreds of thousands suffering the peculiar torments of the proletarian paradise of Eastern Germany." In the late 1950s at the invitation of Cord Meyer, he accepted a post with the CIA, for whom he traveled the globe as a deep cover operative—his son, Nathan McCarry, CEO of Pluribus International Corporation, in 2014 described his father's work for the CIA as "trying for the family." He left the CIA, in 1967, becoming a writer of spy novels McCarry rarely spoke or wrote directly about those years, saying simply, "For a decade at the height of the Cold War, I worked abroad under cover as an intelligence agent."
In the mid-to-late 1970s, several books by former CIA operatives helped trigger and fuel what became known as the U.S. Senate Church Committee hearings that resulted in legislation limiting the power and secrecy of the CIA. McCarry had been "outed"—publicly identified as a secret CIA operative—in 1975, but was never called to testify.
As an editor and writer.
McCarry was an editor-at-large for "National Geographic" and contributed pieces to "The New York Times", "The Wall Street Journal", "The Washington Post", the "Saturday Evening Post," and other national publications.
In as essay published by the "Washington Post", he said that "for a writer in America, going out to dinner is like living as an American in Europe: Total strangers think they can say anything they like to you."
Paul Christopher series.
Ten of McCarry's novels involve the life story of a fictional character named Paul Christopher, who — in McCarry's telling — grew up in pre-Nazi Germany, and later served in the Marines and became an operative for a U.S. government entity that is clearly the Central Intelligence Agency.
These books are, in order of publication:
Alternately, in chronological order of events depicted:
The Paul Christopher novels, together and separately, resemble a Christopher Nolan movie in that time sequences become jumbled; e.g. only as Paul Christopher becomes an old man do readers learn about his parents and childhood.
One critic notes that "As far as recurring characters go, one must look to John Updike's 'Rabbit' Angstrom books or Philip Roth's Nathan Zuckerman novels for equivalents in the scope and breadth of what McCarry accomplishes with one character and his movements through the events of the twentieth century." 
Reviews.
"It’s tempting to say that Charles McCarry’s "The Tears of Autumn" is the greatest espionage novel ever written by an American, if only because it’s hard to conceive of one that could possibly be better. But since no one can claim to have read every America espionage novel ever written, let’s just say that "The Tears of Autumn" is a perfect spy novel, and that its hero, Paul Christopher, should by all rights be known the world over as the thinking man’s James Bond — and woman’s too."—Brendan Bernard, "The Great American Spy Novel," March 31, 2005', LA Weekly"
""Old Boys" is a large yarn that will make yummy reading between long looks at Nantucket Sound this summer. (And a boffo movie in the right hands.) But it is a tale that travels from the outlandish to the absurd. As long as readers don't expect the taut realism we have come to expect from the man, they'll be fine. If they're looking for vintage McCarry, though, this will produce unhappy campers. The book does not approach his better grownup fiction. It is not in the same league, for example, with "The Miernik Dossier", the small gem that made McCarry's career. Rather, it is something of a "Treasure Island" for lovers of spook fiction, a near-juvenile adventure that entrances adults who know better with fabulous writing. What they do get is a fleeting reprise of McCarry's great creation, Paul Christopher. Christopher, the spy whom many first met in McCarry's bestseller "The Tears of Autumn", is now an opaque older man and an ascetic survivor of a Chinese prison camp."--Sam Allis, "McCarry's thriller 'Old Boys' is a trip past believable," Boston "Globe", July 26, 2004.
McCarry and literary criticism.
McCarry's most recent work has been cited for its "postmodern skepticism" and "epistemic aporia" – "literary reconstruction that profess to unmask" state-sponsored secrecy. These judgments are based on the work of Robert Snyder.
In 2007, novelist and former presidential speechwriter Patrick Andersson wrote that "a new generation of American spy novelists soon began [in the 1970s] to produce a body of work that has surpassed that of current British writers. The four most important are Charles McCarry, Robert Littell, Daniel Silva, and Alan Furst."
McCarry and the JFK assassination in real life and in his fiction.
McCarry's fiction: Insights into the CIA.
Note: In McCarry's fiction, the CIA is called "the Outfit."
China as America's chief enemy.
After the collapse of the USSR, McCarry turned to China in "The Shanghai Factor", "Old Boys", "Second Sight" and "Last Supper".
How McCarry responded to the accepted wisdom of his time.
McCarry challenged accepted wisdom about JFK by hypothesizing that Kennedy caused his own death; asserting that efforts to force Richard Nixon from the White House constituted a coup; and giving Ronald Reagan credit for triggering the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Autobiographical elements in McCarry's fiction.
How an aging McCarry depicts aging in his fiction.
Paul Christopher as a central character never is older than his forties—see "Tears of Autumn"—which is the same as McCarry was when he wrote it; after Tears, Christopher spends twenty (unseen) years at hard labor in a remote Chinese prison camp, and then is a minor character in his own rescue.
The former spy as novelist.
The novelist Alan Furst has written in "The Book of Spies" that "[Graham] Greene, [John] le Carré, [Somerset] Maugham, and McCarry write with a kind of cloaked anger, a belief that the world is a place where political power is maintained by treachery and betrayal..." In its subtitle, Furst's book calls such writing "literary espionage."
McCarry on being alone.
A hero with no name.
"Your name is the one key thing that cannot be taken from you," says Jan Scruggs, founder of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, "It captures who you are and what happens to you throughout your life." In Existentialist literature, lack of a name—or of a full name—symbolizes human aloneness; the hero of Franz Kafka's "The Trial", for example is "Michael K.," and the hero of Ralph Ellison's
"Invisible Man" has no name at all. Named characters fill McCarry's last three novels, but each book's hero (in one case, heroine) never has a name; one has a "funny name" that is used for payroll and administrative paperwork, but is fictitious and meaningless. While McCarry's heroes with no name are different people in each story, the Man with No Name in three Clint Eastwood movies from the mid-1960s is the same person.
Adaptations in other media.
The film "Wrong is Right" (1982), starring Sean Connery, was loosely based on McCarry's novel, "The Better Angels" (1979).
Influences.
McCarry was an admirer of the work of W. Somerset Maugham, especially the stories. He was also an admirer of Richard Condon, author of "The Manchurian Candidate" (1959), "Prizzi's Honor" (1982), and numerous other novels.
Other books and publications.
Collections that include McCarry's work.
Otto Penzler, ed.:
Published poems.
Note: The fictional Paul Christopher had several books of poetry published before he joined the CIA;

