
Cooking bananas are banana cultivars in the genus "Musa" whose fruits are generally used in cooking. They may be eaten ripe or unripe and are generally starchy. Many cooking bananas are referred to as plantains ( , ) or green bananas, although not all of them are true plantains. Bananas are treated as a starchy fruit with a relatively neutral flavour and soft texture when cooked. Bananas fruit all year round, making them a reliable all-season staple food.
Cooking bananas are a major food staple in West and Central Africa, the Caribbean islands, Central America, and northern South America. Members of the genus "Musa" are indigenous to the tropical regions of Southeast Asia and Oceania, including the Malay Archipelago (modern Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines) and Northern Australia. Africa is considered a second centre of diversity for "Musa" cultivars: West Africa for some plantains and the central highlands for East African Highland bananas ("Musa" AAA-EAHB; known as "matoke" in Uganda), most of which are cooked, although some are primarily used to make beer.
The term "plantain" is loosely applied to any banana cultivar that is usually cooked before it is eaten. However, there is no botanical distinction between bananas and plantains. Cooking is also a matter of custom, rather than necessity, for many bananas. Ripe plantains can be eaten raw, since their starches are converted to sugars in the ripening process. In countries where only a few cultivars of banana are consumed, there may be a clear distinction between plantains and bananas; in countries where many cultivars are consumed, there is no distinction in the common names used.
In botanical usage, the term "plantain" is used only for true plantains, while other starchy cultivars used for cooking are called "cooking bananas". All modern true plantains have three sets of chromosomes (i.e. they are triploid). Many are hybrids derived from the cross of two wild species, "Musa acuminata" and "Musa balbisiana". The currently accepted scientific name for all such crosses is "Musa" × "paradisiaca". Using Simmonds and Shepherds' 1955 genome-based nomenclature system, cultivars which are cooked often belong to the AAB Group, although some (e.g. the East African Highland bananas) belong to the AAA Group, and others (e.g. Saba bananas) belong to the ABB Group.
Fe'i bananas ("Musa" × "troglodytarum") from the Pacific Islands are often eaten roasted or boiled, and are thus informally referred to as "mountain plantains." However, they do not belong to either of the two species from which all modern banana cultivars are descended.
Description.
Plantains contain more starch and less sugar than dessert bananas, therefore they are usually cooked or otherwise processed before being eaten. They are always cooked or fried when eaten green. At this stage, the pulp is hard and the peel often so stiff that it has to be cut with a knife to be removed.
Mature, yellow plantains can be peeled like typical dessert bananas; the pulp is softer than in immature, green fruit and some of the starch has been converted to sugar. They can be eaten raw, but are not as flavourful as dessert bananas, so are usually cooked. When yellow plantains are fried, they tend to caramelize, turning a golden-brown color. They can also be boiled, baked, microwaved, or grilled over charcoal, either peeled or unpeeled.
Plantains are a staple food in the tropical regions of the world, ranking as the tenth most important staple food in the world. As a staple, plantains are treated in much the same way as potatoes and with a similar neutral flavour and texture when the unripe fruit is cooked by steaming, boiling, or frying.
Since they fruit all year round, plantains are a reliable, all-season staple food, particularly in developing countries with inadequate food storage, preservation, and transportation technologies. In Africa, plantains and bananas provide more than 25 percent of the caloric requirements for over 70 million people. Plantain plantations are vulnerable to destruction by hurricanes, because "Musa" spp. do not withstand high winds well.
An average plantain provides about of food energy and is a good source of potassium and dietary fiber. The sap from the fruit peel, as well as the entire plant, can stain clothing and hands, and can be difficult to remove.
Taxonomy.
Linnaeus originally classified bananas into two species based only on their uses as food: "Musa paradisiaca" for plantains and "Musa sapientum" for dessert bananas. Both are now known to be hybrids between the species "Musa acuminata" (A genome) and "Musa balbisiana" (B genome). The earlier published name, "Musa" × "paradisiaca", is now used as the scientific name for all such hybrids. Most modern plantains are sterile triploids belonging to the AAB Group, sometimes known as the "Plantain group". Other economically important cooking banana groups include the East African Highland bananas (Mutika/Lujugira subgroup) of the AAA Group and the Pacific plantains (including the Popoulo, Maoli, and Iholena subgroups), also of the AAB Group.
Dishes.
Africa.
Plantains are used in the Ivory Coast dish "aloco" as the main ingredient. Fried plantains are covered in an onion-tomato sauce, often with a grilled fish between the plantains and sauce.
"Boli" is the term used for roasted plantain in Nigeria. The plantain is usually grilled and served with roasted fish, ground peanuts and a hot palm oil sauce. It is very popular as a lunch snack in southern and western Nigeria, for example in Rivers State, Bayelsa State, Cross River State, Delta State, Edo State and Lagos State. It is popular among the working class as a quick midday meal.
Plantain is popular in West Africa, especially Cameroon, Bénin, Ghana and Nigeria; when ripe plantain is fried, it is generally called "dodo" (dough – dough). The ripe plantain is usually sliced diagonally for a large oval shape, then fried in oil to a golden brown color. This can be eaten as such, with stew or served with beans or on rice.
In Ikire, a town in Western Nigeria precisely Osun State, there is a special and unique way of preparing plantain chips. This is popularly called Dodo Ikire. Dodo Ikire is made from overripe plantain, chopped in small pieces, sprinkled with chili pepper and fried in boiling point palm oil. After frying it turns blackish. The fried plantain chips are then stuffed carefully into a special conically shaped woven basket about high. This special dodo can have a preservative quality that lasts up to two months without refrigeration.
"Matooke", or "matoke", is a cooking banana dish of the Baganda, now widely prepared in Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and eastern Congo. The cooking bananas (specifically East African Highland bananas) are peeled, wrapped in the plant's leaves and set in a cooking pot (a "sufuria") on the stalks that have been removed from the leaves. The pot is then placed on a charcoal fire and the matoke is steamed for a few hours. While uncooked, the "matoke" is white and fairly hard, but cooking turns it soft and yellow. The "matoke" is then mashed while still wrapped in the leaves, and often is served on a fresh leaf and eaten with a sauce made of vegetables, ground peanuts, or some type of meat (goat meat and beef are common).
Caribbean.
"Fufu de platano" is a traditional and very popular lunch dish in Cuba, and essentially akin to the Puerto Rican mofongo. It is a "fufu" made by boiling the plantains in water and mashing with a fork. The "fufu" is then mixed with chicken stock and "sofrito", a sauce made from lard, garlic, onions, pepper, tomato sauce, a touch of vinegar and cumin. The texture of Cuban "fufu" is similar to the "mofongo" consumed in Puerto Rico, but it is not formed into a ball or fried. "Fufu" is also a common centuries-old traditional dish made in Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Cameroon and other West &amp; Central African countries. It is made in a similar fashion as the Cuban "fufu", but is pounded, and has a thick paste, putty-like texture which is then formed into a ball. West African "fufu" is sometimes separately made with cassava, yams or made with plantains combined with cassava.
Eto is a popular Ghanaian traditional dish. It is mainly made from boiled and mashed yam or plantain. For the plantain option called 'Boodie eto', the plantain can be used unripe, slightly ripe or fully ripe.
Culturally, it was the food fed to a bride on the day of her marriage and it's best savored with a whole egg, groundnut (peanuts) and sliced avocado.
A traditional mangú from the Dominican Republic consists of peeled green, boiled plantains, mashed with enough hot water they were boiled in so the consistency is a little stiffer than mashed potatoes. It is traditionally eaten for breakfast, topped with sautéed red onions in apple cider vinegar and accompanied by fried eggs, fried cheese, and/or fried bologna sausage thats known as Dominican salami.
Central and South America.
Cayeye, also called Mote de Guineo, is a traditional Colombian dish from the Caribbean Coast of the country. Cayeye is made by cooking small green bananas or plantains in water, then mashing and mixing them with refrito, made with onions, garlic, red bell pepper, tomato and achiote.
Cayeye are usually served for breakfast with fresh grated Colombian cheese (Queso Costeño) and fried fish, shrimp, crab, or beef. Most popular is Cayeye with fresh cheese, avocado and fried egg on top.
"Chifles" is the Spanish term used in Peru and Ecuador for fried green plantains sliced (1 or 2 mm thick); it is also used to describe plantain chips which are sliced thinner. In Ecuador, plantain is boiled, crushed, scrambled, and fried into "majado". This dish is typically served with a cup of coffee and bistek, fish, or grated cheese. It is a popular breakfast dish. Majado is also used as a base to prepare "tigrillo" and "bolones". To prepare tigrillo, majado is scrambled with pork rind, egg, cheese, green onions, parsley, and cilantro. To prepare bolones, majado is scrambled with cheese, pork rind, or a mixture of both. The resulting mixture is then shaped into a sphere which is later deep-fried. Both tigrillo and bolones are typically served with a cup of coffee.
In Honduras, Venezuela and Central Colombia, fried ripened plantain slices are known as "tajadas". They are customary in most typical meals, such as the Venezuelan "pabellón criollo". The host or waiter may also offer them as "barandas" (guard rails), in common slang, as the long slices are typically placed on the sides of a full dish, and therefore look as such. Some variations include adding honey or sugar and frying the slices in butter, to obtain a golden caramel; the result has a sweeter taste and a characteristic pleasant smell. The same slices are known as "amarillos" and "fritos maduros" in Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic respectively.
In Honduras, they are a popular takeaway food, usually with fried chicken, though they are also regularly eaten at home. They are popular chips sold in "pulperias" (minimarkets). 
In Panama, "tajadas" are eaten daily together with steamed rice, meat and beans, thus making up an essential part of the Panamanian diet, as with Honduras.
By contrast, in Nicaragua, "tajadas" are fried unripened plantain slices, and are traditionally served at a "fritanga" with fried pork, or on their own on green banana leaves, either with a cabbage salad or fresh cheese.
On Colombia's Caribbean coast, "tajadas" of fried green plantain are consumed along with grilled meats, and are the dietary equivalent of the French-fried potatoes/chips of Europe and North America.
After removing the skin, the ripened fruit ("maduro") can be sliced (between 3 mm and 2 cm thick) and pan-fried in oil until golden brown or according to preference. In the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Colombia, Honduras (where they are usually eaten with the native sour cream) and Venezuela, they are also eaten baked in the oven (sometimes with cinnamon). In Puerto Rico baked "plátanos maduros" are usually eaten for breakfast and served with eggs (mainly an omelet with cheese), chorizo or bacon. Only salt is added to green plantains.
"Tostones" (also known as "banann peze" in Haiti, "tachinos" or "chatinos" in Cuba, "platanos verdes fritos" or "fritos verdes" in the Dominican Republic and "patacones" in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Honduras, Panama, Peru and Venezuela) are twice-fried plantain patties, often served as a side dish, appetizer, or snack. Plantains are sliced in pieces and fried in oil. The segments are then removed and individually smashed down either with the bottom of a bottle or with a "tostonera", to about half their original height. Finally, the pieces are fried again and then seasoned, often with salt. In some countries, such as Haiti, Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, the "tostones" are dipped in creole sauce from chicken, pork, beef, or shrimp before eating. In Nicaragua, tostones are typically served with fried cheese (Tostones con queso) and sometimes with refried beans. In some South American countries, the name "tostones" is used to describe this food when prepared at home and also plantain chips (mentioned above), which are typically purchased from a store.
In western Venezuela, much of Colombia and the Peruvian Amazon, "patacones" are a frequently seen variation of "tostones". Plantains are sliced in long pieces and fried in oil, then used to make sandwiches with pork, beef, chicken, vegetables and ketchup. They can be made with unripe "patacon verde" or ripe "patacon amarillo" plantains. "Tostones" in the Dominican Republic are only fried once and are thicker than chips. Although there are local names for "tostones" in almost every Latin country, they are still commonly called "tostones" in all of Latin America.
Tacacho is a roasted plantain Amazonian cuisine dish from Peru. It is usually served "con cecina", with bits of pork.
In Venezuela, a yo-yo is a traditional dish made of two short slices of fried ripened plantain (see Tajadas) placed on top of each other, with local soft white cheese in the middle (in a sandwich-like fashion) and held together with toothpicks. The arrangement is dipped in beaten eggs and fried again until the cheese melts and the yo-yo acquires a deep golden hue. They are served as sides or entrees.
India.
"Ethakka appam", "pazham" (banana) "boli" or "pazham pori" are terms used for fried plantain in Kerala. The plantain is usually dipped in sweetened rice and white flour batter and then fried in coconut or vegetable oil. It is a very popular snack among Keralites. This is very similar to pisang goreng (Indonesian for fried bananas), which is a dessert common to Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore. It is also known as "bajji" in Southern Indian states.
An alternative way of cooking in Kerala is to boil or steam the banana, which is also at times filled with grated coconut, cardamon powder and sugar/jaggery and then sauteed in ghee.
Indonesia.
"Nagasari" is a traditional steamed "kue" (Indonesian traditional cake) made from rice flour, coconut milk and sugar, filled with slices of banana. It is usually wrapped in banana leaves before being steamed, or prepared with pandan that gives it aroma. It is commonly eaten as a snack in Indonesia where it is also known as "kue bandang-bandang" by Bugis people. Sometimes it is simply called "kue pisang" (banana cake).
"Pisang goreng " ("fried banana" in Indonesian and Malay) is a plantain snack deep-fried in coconut oil. "Pisang goreng" can be coated in batter flour or fried without batter. It is a snack food mostly found in Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei.
Philippines.
The most important Philippine cooking banana is the saba banana (as well as the very similar cardava banana). These are much smaller than the Latin American varieties, usually around 4–5 inches, and somewhat boxy in shape. Although not a staple, saba bananas are commonly cooked in a wide variety of native dishes.
They are cooked and eaten mostly in their ripe stage in dessert dishes, including:
Savory dishes that use saba bananas include:
Puerto Rico.
Puerto Rico has a close relationship with plantains. Many dishes originating from Puerto Rico can be seen in other parts the Caribbean and Latin America.
Other preparations.
Chips.
After removing the skin, the unripe fruit can be sliced thin and deep fried in hot oil to produce chips. This thin preparation of plantain is known as "tostones", "patacones" or "plataninas" in some of Central American and South American countries, "platanutres" in Puerto Rico, "mariquitas" or "chicharritas" in Cuba and "chifles" in Ecuador and Peru. In Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Puerto Rico and Venezuela, "tostones" instead refers to thicker twice-fried patties (see below). In Cuba, plantain chips are called "mariquitas". They are sliced thinly, and fried in oil until golden colored. They are popular appetizers served with a main dish. In Colombia they are known as "platanitos" and are eaten with suero atollabuey as a snack. "Tostada" refers to a green, unripe plantain which has been cut into sections, fried, flattened, fried again, and salted. These tostadas are often served as a side dish or a snack. They are also known as "tostones" or "patacones" in many Latin American countries. In Honduras, banana chips are called "tajadas", which may be sliced vertically to create a variation known as plantain strips.
Chips fried in coconut oil and sprinkled with salt, called "upperi" or "kaya varuthathu", are a snack in South India in Kerala. They are an important item in sadya, a vegetarian feast prepared during festive occasions in Kerala. The chips are typically labeled "plantain chips" when they are made of green plantains that taste starchy, like potato chips. In Tamil Nadu, a thin variety made from green plantains is used to make chips seasoned with salt, chili powder and asafoetida. In the western/central Indian language Marathi, the plantain is called "rajeli kela" (figuratively meaning "king-sized" banana), and is often used to make fried chips.
Dried flour.
Plantains are also dried and ground into flour; "banana meal" forms an important foodstuff.
In southern India, dried plantain powder is mixed with a little bit of fennel seed powder and boiled in milk or water to make baby food to feed babies until they are one year old.
Drink.
In Peru, plantains are boiled and blended with water, spices, and sugar to make chapo. In Kerala , ripe plantains are boiled with sago, coconut milk, sugar and spices to make a pudding.
Ketchup.
The Philippines uniquely processes saba bananas into banana ketchup. It was originally invented in World War II as a substitute for tomato ketchup.
Nutrition.
Plantain is 32% carbohydrates with 2% dietary fiber and 15% sugars, 1% protein, 0.4% fat, and 65% water, and supplying of food energy in a reference serving (table). Raw plantain is an excellent source (20% or higher of the Daily Value, DV) of vitamin B6 (23% DV) and vitamin C (22% DV), and a good source (10–19% DV) of magnesium and potassium (table).
Containing little beta-carotene (457 micrograms per 100 grams), plantain is not a good source of vitamin A (table).
Comparison to other staple foods.
The following table shows the nutrient content of raw plantain and major staple foods.
Allergies.
Plantain and banana allergies occur with typical characteristics of food allergy or latex fruit syndrome, including itching and mild swelling of the lips, tongue, palate or throat, skin rash, stomach complaints or anaphylactic shock. Among more than 1000 proteins identified in "Musa" species were numerous previously described protein allergens.

