
Norman Colin Dexter (29 September 1930 – 21 March 2017) was an English crime writer known for his "Inspector Morse" series of novels, which were written between 1975 and 1999 and adapted as an ITV television series, "Inspector Morse", from 1987 to 2000. His characters have spawned a sequel series, "Lewis", and a prequel series, "Endeavour".
Early life and career.
Dexter was born in Stamford, Lincolnshire, to Alfred and Dorothy Dexter. He had an elder brother, John, a fellow classicist, who taught Classics at The King's School, Peterborough, and a sister, Avril. Alfred ran a small garage and taxi company from premises in Scotgate, Stamford. Dexter was educated at St. John's Infants School, Bluecoat Junior School, from which he gained a scholarship to Stamford School, a boys' public school, where one of his contemporaries was the England international cricket captain and England international rugby player M. J. K. Smith.
After leaving school, Dexter completed his national service with the Royal Corps of Signals and then read Classics at Christ's College, Cambridge, graduating in 1953 and receiving a master's degree in 1958.
In 1954, Dexter began his teaching career in the East Midlands, becoming assistant Classics master at Wyggeston School, Leicester. There he helped the Christian Union school society. However, in 2000 he stated that he shared the same views on politics and religion as Inspector Morse, who was portrayed in the final Morse novel, "The Remorseful Day", as an atheist.
A post at Loughborough Grammar School followed in 1957 before he took up the position of senior Classics teacher at Corby Grammar School, Northamptonshire, in 1959. 
In 1966, he was forced by the onset of deafness to retire from teaching and took up the post of senior assistant secretary at the University of Oxford Delegacy of Local Examinations (UODLE) in Oxford, a job he held until his retirement in 1988.
In November 2008, Dexter featured prominently in the BBC programme "How to Solve a Cryptic Crossword" as part of the "Time Shift" series, in which he recounted some of the crossword clues solved by Morse.
Writing career.
The initial books written by Dexter were general studies text books. He began writing mysteries in 1972 during a family holiday. "Last Bus to Woodstock" was published in 1975 and introduced the character of Inspector Morse, the irascible detective whose penchants for cryptic crosswords, English literature, cask ale, and music by composer Wagner reflect Dexter's own enthusiasms. Dexter's plots used false leads and other red herrings.
The success of the 33 two-hour episodes of the ITV television series "Inspector Morse", produced between 1987 and 2000, brought further attention to Dexter's writings, featuring both Morse and his assistant Sergeant Robert Lewis. In the manner of Alfred Hitchcock, Dexter made a cameo appearance in almost all episodes. From 2006 to 2016, Morse's assistant featured in a 33-episode ITV series titled "Lewis" ("Inspector Lewis" in the United States). 
A prequel series, "Endeavour", featuring a young Morse and starring Shaun Evans and Roger Allam, began airing on the ITV network in 2012. Dexter was a consultant in the first few years of the programme. As with "Morse", Dexter occasionally made cameo appearances in "Lewis" and "Endeavour". "Endeavour" has aired seven series, with the eighth series expected to air in early 2021, taking young Morse's career into 1971.
Part of the audio in the television episodes includes playing the Morse code for Morse's name. It is part of Dexter's life that his military service was as a Morse code operator in the Royal Corps of Signals. These are false clues for why Dexter named his character; he named his character for his friend Sir Jeremy Morse, a crossword devotee like Dexter.
Awards and honours.
Dexter received several Crime Writers' Association awards: two Silver Daggers for "Service of All the Dead" in 1979 and "The Dead of Jericho" in 1981; two Gold Daggers for "The Wench is Dead" in 1989 and "The Way Through the Woods" in 1992; and a Cartier Diamond Dagger for lifetime achievement in 1997. In 1996, Dexter received a Macavity Award for his short story "Evans Tries an O-Level". In 1980, he was elected a member of the by-invitation-only Detection Club. In 2005 Dexter became a Fellow by Special Election of St Cross College, Oxford.
In 2000 Dexter was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire for services to literature. In 2001 he was awarded the Freedom of the City of Oxford. In September 2011, the University of Lincoln awarded Dexter an honorary Doctor of Letters degree.
Personal life.
In 1956 he married Dorothy Cooper. They had a daughter, Sally, and a son, Jeremy.
Death.
On 21 March 2017 Dexter's publisher, Macmillan, said in a statement "With immense sadness, Macmillan announces the death of Colin Dexter who died peacefully at his home in Oxford this morning."

