
This article is about the demographic features of the population of Denmark, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.
National demographics.
Since 1980, the number of Danes has remained constant at around 5 million in Denmark and nearly all the population growth from 5.1 up to the 2018 total of 5.8 million was due to immigration.
According to 2017 figures from Statistics Denmark, 86.9% of Denmark's population of over 5,760,694 was of Danish descent, defined as having at least one parent who was born in Denmark and has Danish citizenship. The remaining 13.1% were of a foreign background, defined as immigrants or descendants of recent immigrants. With the same definition, the most common countries of origin were Poland, Turkey, Germany, Iraq, Romania, Syria, Somalia, Iran, Afghanistan, and Yugoslavia and its successor states.
More than 752,618 individuals (13.1%) are migrants and their descendants (146,798 second generation migrants born in Denmark).
Of these 752,618 immigrants and their descendants:
Ethnic groups.
Non-Scandinavian ethnic minorities include:
Historic minorities.
Ethnic minorities in Denmark include a handful of groups:
Modern minorities.
In the modern minorities counts first-generation immigrants, second-generation (Descdentants in danish statistics classification) and third-generation (Children of descendants in danish classification). Children of descendants could be both of "Danish origin" (if both of their parents were born in Denmark with Danish citizenship) and of "foreign origin" (if one of their parents is a second-generation immigrant and another - first-generation). Therefore, this table included all people of the respective background, people who are classified as of "foreign background" and third-generation immigrants, who classified as of "Danish origin". 
Total fertility rate from 1850 to 1899.
The total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.
Vital statistics since 1900.
Data according to Statistics Denmark, which collects the official statistics for Denmark.
Note. Population as of 31 December.
Life expectancy from 1775 to 2015.
Sources: Our World In Data and the United Nations.
1775–1950
1950–2015
Source: "UN World Population Prospects"
Religion.
The Church of Denmark () is state-supported and, according to statistics from January 2019, accounts for about 74.7% of Denmark's religious affiliation. Denmark has had religious freedom guaranteed since 1849 by the Constitution, and numerous other religions are officially recognised, including several Christian denominations, Muslim, Jewish, Buddhist, Hindu and other congregations as well as Forn Siðr, a revival of Scandinavian pagan tradition. The Department of Ecclesiastical Affairs recognises roughly a hundred religious congregations for tax and legal purposes such as conducting wedding ceremonies.
Islam is the second largest religion in Denmark. In 2020, an estimated 4.4% of the Danish population were Muslims.
For historical reasons, there is a formal distinction between 'approved' () and 'recognised' () congregations of faith. The latter include 11 traditional denominations, such as Roman Catholics, the Reformed Church, the Mosaic Congregation, Methodists and Baptists, some of whose privileges in the country date hundreds of years back. These have the additional rights of having priests appointed by royal resolution and to christen/name children with legal effect.
Demographic statistics.
Population.
Denmark's population from 1769 to 2007.
Demographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2019.
Demographic statistics according to the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
note: data represent population by ancestry

