
Dana Michelle Plato (née Strain; November 7, 1964 – May 8, 1999) was an American actress and model. She was known for portraying Kimberly Drummond on the NBC/ABC sitcom "Diff'rent Strokes" (1978–1986), for which she received a Young Artist Award nomination. 
Aside from her television work, Plato also worked in film, appearing in the horror film "" (1977) as Sandra Phalor, headlining the adventure-horror film "Return to Boggy Creek" (1977) as Evie Jo, and starring in the comedy film "California Suite" (1978) as Jenny Warren, the latter being her only critically and commercially successful film role. Starting from the mid-1980s, Plato worked sporadically in independent films, and starred as Kelli Medd in the horror game "Night Trap" (1992), being one of the first celebrities to appear in a video game.
Throughout a personal life receiving much media coverage, Plato struggled with substance and alcohol abuse, and dealt with various legal issues. In 1999, she died from a drug overdose (later ruled a suicide) of prescription drugs at the age of 34.
Early life.
Plato was born Dana Michelle Strain on November 7, 1964, in Maywood, California to Linda Strain, an unwed teenager who was already caring for an 18-month-old child. In June 1965, the seven-month-old Dana was adopted by Dean Plato, who owned a trucking company, and his wife Florine "Kay" Plato. Plato was raised in the San Fernando Valley. When she was three, her adoptive parents divorced and she lived with her mother.
Career.
At a very young age, Plato began attending auditions with her mother, and from age seven appeared in over 100 commercials. She made her television acting debut at the age of 11, making a cameo appearance on the television show "The Six Million Dollar Man". Following this, she starred in the television film "Beyond the Bermuda Triangle". 
Plato made her film debut at the age of 13, appearing as Sandra Phalor in the horror film "" (1977), for which she was uncredited, and starring as Evie Joe in the horror film "Return to Boggy Creek" (1977) in the same year, both of which were received negatively by critics. 
Plato next starred as Jenny Warren in "California Suite" (1978); although a minor role, the film was a critical and commercial success, and earned accolades from the Academy Awards and the Golden Globe Awards. This would turn to be Plato's first and only successful feature film. In addition to acting, Plato was an accomplished figure skater, and at one point she trained for a possible Olympic team spot. 
It was during this time that she made a brief appearance on TV's "The Gong Show" and was spotted by a producer who helped cast her as Kimberly Drummond, the older sister to adopted brothers Arnold and Willis Jackson, on the sitcom "Diff'rent Strokes". The series debuted on NBC in 1978, becoming an immediate hit. Plato starred on the show from 1978 until 1984, and again from 1985 to 1986; during her tenure, the show appeared on two different networks. In the Season 8 episode that aired on January 17, 1986—Plato's final appearance on the show—Kimberly suffered from the effects of bulimia. She was nominated for a Young Artist Award for her work on "Diff'rent Strokes", and also was part of two TV Land Award nominations given to the cast of the show. 
In 1981, Plato appeared in the television special "A Step In Time". For her role, Plato received a Young Artist Award nomination. In 1983, she starred in the television film "High School U.S.A." as Cara Ames, alongside Todd Bridges, who starred as Otto Lipton. In spite of the film being met with a mixed response from critics and viewers alike, it gained popularity at the time of its premiere particularly for its cast.
After leaving "Diff'rent Strokes", Plato attempted to establish herself as a serious actress, but found it difficult to achieve success. She had breast implants and modeled for a June 1989 "Playboy" pictorial, but her career remained stagnant. Consequently, she started taking roles in such B-movies as "Bikini Beach Race" (1989) and "Lethal Cowboy" (1992). 
In 1992, Plato starred in the video game "Night Trap", becoming one of the first celebrities to appear in a video game. The game was a moderate success (the majority of the game's video content was actually filmed in 1987 and then shelved), but is considered a pioneering title because it was the first to use live actors, one of whom was a well-known personality. Though the game received mixed to negative reviews, it is best remembered for the controversy it created over the violence and sexuality, along with that surrounding "Mortal Kombat", which had eventually led to the creation of the Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB).
Toward the end of her career, Plato chose roles that were erotic; she appeared nude in "Prime Suspect" (1989) and "Compelling Evidence" (1995), and in the softcore erotic drama "Different Strokes: The Story of Jack and Jill...and Jill" (1998), the title of which was changed after filming, in order to tie it to Plato's past. Following her appearance in the film, in the same year, Plato appeared in a cover story of the Lesbian lifestyle-magazine "Girlfriends". 
Her last works include "Desperation Boulevard" (1998), in which she appears as herself, and which appears to be based on her life, "Silent Scream" (1999), in which she appears as Emma Jones, and "Pacino Is Missing" (2002), which was released after her death, in which she appears as an attorney.
Personal life.
In 1995, during an appearance on "The Marilyn Kagen Show" along with co-star Todd Bridges, she spoke more of how she was raised, commenting on her mother and how she had not learned "reality and life skills". Plato stated: "My mother made sure that I was normal. The only thing that she did, the mistake she made, was that she kept me in a plastic bubble. So, I didn't learn about reality and life skills." Marilyn Kagen, the host of the show, told Plato that she may have been used for a free meal ticket, which Plato denied, explaining that her mother's ways were so that she would not become a primadonna. 
During her years on "Diff'rent Strokes", Plato struggled with drug and alcohol problems. She admitted to drinking alcohol, using cannabis and cocaine, and suffered an overdose of diazepam when she was 14.
In December 1983, Plato moved in with her boyfriend, rock guitarist Lanny Lambert. The couple married on April 24, 1984, and their only child, Tyler Edward Lambert, was born on July 2, 1984. When it was revealed that she was pregnant, she was written out of "Diff'rent Strokes". Her co-star Conrad Bain had revealed that she was happy about her baby and that she would no longer be alone. Bain stated in an interview with "People": "She deliberately got pregnant while doing the series, when I spoke to her about it, she was enthusiastic about having done that. ... When I get the baby, I will never be alone again."
Plato separated from Lambert in January 1988, the same week her mother died of scleroderma. In desperation over these traumatic events, she signed over power of attorney to an accountant who disappeared with the majority of her money, leaving her with less than $150,000. She claimed the accountant was never found nor prosecuted, despite an exhaustive search, and that he had also stolen more than $11 million of other people's money. During her March 1990 divorce, Plato lost custody of her son to Lambert and was given visitation rights.
On February 28, 1991, she entered a video store, produced a pellet gun, and demanded the money in the cash register. The clerk called 9-1-1 and said, "I've just been robbed by the girl who played Kimberly on "Diff'rent Strokes"." Approximately 15 minutes after the robbery, Plato returned to the scene and was immediately arrested. Plato had stolen $164. Las Vegas entertainer Wayne Newton posted her $13,000 bail, and Plato was given five years' probation. Plato made headlines and became a subject of the national debate surrounding troubled child stars, particularly given the difficulties of her "Diff'rent Strokes" co-stars Gary Coleman and Todd Bridges. In January 1992, she was arrested again, this time for forging a prescription for diazepam. She served 30 days in jail for violating the terms of her probation and immediately entered a drug rehabilitation program.
Plato later moved to Las Vegas, where she struggled with poverty and unemployment. At one point she worked at a dry-cleaning store, where customers reported being impressed by her lack of airs. She became engaged to Fred Potts, a filmmaker, but the romance ended. She was married to actor and producer Scott Atkins (Scotty Gelt) in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, for one month before the marriage was annulled. Before her death, she was engaged to her manager Robert Menchaca, with whom she lived in a motor home in Navarre, Florida.
On May 7, 1999, the day before she died, Plato appeared on "The Howard Stern Show". She spoke about her life, discussing her financial problems and past run-ins with the law. She admitted to being a recovering alcoholic and drug addict, but claimed she had been sober for more than 10 years by that point and was not using any drugs, with the exception of prescribed painkillers due to the recent extraction of her wisdom teeth. Many callers to the show insulted her and questioned her sobriety, which angered and provoked a defiant Plato, who offered to take a drug test on the air. Some callers, as well as host Howard Stern, came to Plato's defense, though Stern also referred to himself as "an enabler", and sarcastically offered Plato drugs. Although she allowed a hair to be cut for the test, Stern later claimed she asked for it back after the interview.
Death.
On May 8, 1999, Plato and Menchaca were returning to California and stopped at Menchaca's mother's home in Moore, Oklahoma, for a Mother's Day visit. Later on in the visit, Plato said that she felt unwell, and took a few doses of a hydrocodone/acetaminophen painkiller (Lortab), along with the muscle-relaxant carisoprodol (Soma), and went to lie down inside her Winnebago motor home with Menchaca, which was parked outside the house. Upon waking up, Menchaca and their family discovered that Plato had died in her sleep, which they later found out was due to an accidental overdose, but was later ruled a suicide based on Plato's long history of drug abuse.
Her body was cremated, and her ashes were scattered over the Pacific Ocean.
Legacy.
In 2000, Fox broadcast a television documentary based on Plato, titled "After Diff'rent Strokes: When the Laughter Stopped". The film was focused on her life and work after the show, including her death. It featured actors who at the time were unknown, as well as Todd Bridges, who made a cameo appearance. In 2006, NBC aired the television film "Behind the Camera: The Unauthorized Story of Diff'rent Strokes", which was based on the lives of the child stars who had worked on the show. At the end of the film, where Bridges and Gary Coleman appeared, they stand near Plato's grave.
On what would have been Plato's 55th birthday, Bridges commented on Twitter about their friendship, leaving a tribute to Plato. Bridges stated: "You were the one person I could always talk to. You were one of my best friends. I will never forget you and love you forever. HAPPY BIRTHDAY Dana Plato R.I.P you are free my friend." On May 6, 2010, two days before the 11th anniversary of Plato's death, her 26-year-old son Tyler committed suicide with a self-inflicted shotgun blast to the head.

