
Differential Manchester encoding (DM) is a line code in digital frequency modulation in which data and clock signals are combined to form a single two-level self-synchronizing data stream. In various specific applications, this method is also called by various other names, including biphase mark code (CC), "F2F (frequency/double frequency)", "Aiken biphase", and conditioned diphase.
Definition.
Differential Manchester encoding is a differential encoding technology, using the presence or absence of transitions to indicate logical value. An improvement to Manchester coding which is a special case of binary phase-shift keying, it is not necessary to know the initial polarity of the transmitted message signal, because the information is not represented by the absolute voltage levels but by their transitions.
Differential Manchester encoding has the following advantages over some other line codes:
These positive features are achieved at the expense of doubling the clock frequency—there are two clock ticks per bit period (marked with full and dotted lines in the figure). At every second clock tick, marked with a dotted line, there is a potential level transition conditional on the data. At the other ticks, the line state changes unconditionally to ease clock recovery. One version of the code makes a transition for 0 and no transition for 1; the other makes a transition for 1 and no transition for 0.
Differential Manchester encoding is specified in the IEEE 802.5 standard for Token Ring local area networks, and is used for many other applications, including magnetic and optical storage. As Biphase Mark Code (BMC), it is used in AES3, S/PDIF, SMPTE time code, USB PD, xDSL and DALI. Many magnetic stripe cards also use BMC encoding, often called F2F (frequency/double frequency) or Aiken Biphase, according to the ISO/IEC 7811 standard. Differential Manchester encoding is also the original modulation method used for single-density floppy disks, followed by double-density modified frequency modulation (MFM), or Differential Manchester encoding.

