
This article contains demographic features of the United Arab Emirates (UAE), including population density, vital statistics, immigration and emigration data, ethnicity, education levels, religions practiced, and languages spoken within the UAE.
Population.
The United Arab Emirates witnessed significant population increase during the past few years because of major growth in the various economic sectors, which lead to influx of workers from diverse cultural and religious background. From 4.1 million in 2005 to roughly 9.5 million in 2018. Out of this, the number of UAE citizens is around 11.5% and the remaining 88.5% made up of Expatriate workers. The largest group of non-UAE nationals are South Asian 59.4% (includes Indians 38.2%, Bangladeshi 9.5%, Pakistani 9.4%, others 2.3%), Egyptian 10.2%, Filipino 6.1%, other 12.8%.
Female citizens and non-citizens account for 28% percent of the UAE'S population due to the high level of male foreign workers. The majority of the UAE population falls in the age group of 25 to 54 year old. A large part of this can be attributed to the expatriate population of working men and women who fall in the age category. Population is heavily concentrated to the northeast on the Musandam Peninsula, the three largest Emirates - Abu Dhabi (2.9 million), Dubai (2.7 million) and Sharjah (1.4 million), are home to nearly 75% of the population.
Education and Employment.
The United Arab Emirates government have always focused on increasing the quality of education, allowing female access to higher education and value their achievements. Currently, there are more women in higher education than men, with total graduates of 58 percent. However, the unemployment rate for women is about more than five times higher than men. The program that is the most popular is business with the highest number of graduates, and the second popular program is Humanities and social science. The UAE relies on migrant workers, and they make up a majority of the population and will continue to increase and will be about 88.2 percent of the population in 2030.
Vital statistics.
Life expectancy.
Source: "UN World Population Prospects"
Ethnicity of UAE immigrants.
The UAE National Bureau of Statistics does not publish demographic data in relation to any nationality. The figures listed in the table below are estimates provided by each country's embassy.
"*The figures for the countries marked with a "*" cannot be directly sourced to embassy statements".
Languages.
Arabic is the official and national language of the UAE. The Gulf dialect of Arabic is spoken by the Emirati people which differs in accents from other Arab/ Middle Eastern countries The Larestani language (Persian dialect) is also spoken by a 303,000 people in the UAE. Apart from Arabic, English is widely used.
Other languages spoken in the UAE, due to immigration, include Malayalam (1,060,000 speakers in the UAE), Urdu, Hindi, Marathi, Persian, Cebuano, Pashto (144,000 speakers in the UAE), Kannada, Bengali (337,000 speakers in the UAE), Punjabi (201,000 speakers in the UAE), Odia, Tamil, Baluchi and Southern Baluchi (379,000 speakers in the UAE), Sinhala (121,000 speakers in the UAE), Russian, Somali, Tagalog (303,000 speakers in the UAE), Nepali, Mandarin, Telugu (455,000 speakers in the UAE), Spanish, Italian and Greek.
In 2019, Abu Dhabi included Hindi as third official court language. Currently, the UAE government provides lectures and tests to obtain a driving license in Urdu, Hindi, Marathi, Malayalam, Tamil and Bengali, besides Arabic and English.
Practiced religions.
Religions are represented in the UAE as follows:
CIA World Factbook demographic statistics.
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook unless otherwise indicated.

