
, also known as was the 16th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.
No firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 313 to 399.
Legendary narrative.
Nintoku is regarded by historians as a "legendary Emperor" of the 5th century. The reign of Emperor Kinmei (A.D.  – 571), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737–806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.
According to the "Nihon Shoki", he was the fourth son of Emperor Ōjin and his mother was Nakatsuhime no Mikoto, a great-granddaughter of Emperor Keikō. He was also the father of Emperors Richū, Hanzei, and Ingyō. His name was .
Nintoku's contemporary title would not have been "tennō", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jitō. Rather, it was presumably , meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven". Alternatively, Nintoku might have been referred to as or the "Great King of Yamato".
Events of Nintoku's life.
Although the "Nihon Shoki" states that Nintoku ruled from 313 to 399, modern research suggests those dates are likely inaccurate.
The achievements of Nintoku's reign which are noted in the "Nihon Shoki" include:
Consorts and children.
Empress (first): , poet and daughter of 
Empress (second): , Emperor Ōjin's daughter
Consort: , Morokata no Kimi Ushimoroi's daughter
Consort: , daughter of Emperor Ōjin
Consort: , daughter of 
Nintoku's tomb.
Daisen Kofun (the largest tomb in Japan) in Sakai, Osaka, is considered to be his final resting place. The actual site of Nintoku's grave is not known.
The Nintoku-ryo tumulus is one of almost 50 tumuli collectively known as "Mozu Kofungun" clustered around the city, and covers the largest area of any tomb in the world. Built in the middle of the 5th century by an estimated 2,000 men working daily for almost 16 years, the Nintoku tumulus, at 486 meters long and with a mound 35 meters high, is twice as long as the base of the famous Great Pyramid of Pharaoh Khufu (Cheops) in Giza.
The Imperial tomb of Nintoku's consort, Iwa-no hime no Mikoto, is said to be located in Saki-cho, Nara City. Both "kofun"-type Imperial tombs are characterized by a keyhole-shaped island located within a wide, water-filled moat.
Imperial tombs and mausolea are cultural properties; but they are guarded and administered by the Imperial Household Agency (IHA), which is the government department responsible for all matters relating to the Emperor and his family. According to the IHA, the tombs are more than a mere repository for historical artifacts; they are sacred religious sites. IHA construes each of the Imperial grave sites as sanctuaries for the spirits of the ancestors of the Imperial House.
Nintoku is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine ("misasagi") at Osaka. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as his mausoleum. It is formally named "Mozu no Mimihara no naka no misasagi".
References.
Specific
External links.
 

