
 was the 52nd emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Saga's reign spanned the years from 809 through 823.
Traditional narrative.
Saga was the second son of Emperor Kanmu and Fujiwara no Otomuro. His personal name was . Saga was an "accomplished calligrapher" able to compose in Chinese who held the first imperial poetry competitions (). According to legend, he was the first Japanese emperor to drink tea.
Saga is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Ukyō-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Saga's mausoleum.
Events of Saga's life.
Soon after his enthronement, Saga himself took ill. At the time the retired Heizei had quarreled with his brother over the ideal location of the court, the latter preferring the Heian capital, while the former was convinced that a shift back to the Nara plain was necessary, and Heizei, exploiting Saga's weakened health, seized the opportunity to foment a rebellion, known historically as the Kusuko Incident; however, forces loyal to Emperor Saga, led by "taishōgun" Sakanoue no Tamuramaro, quickly defeated the Heizei rebels which thus limited the adverse consequences which would have followed any broader conflict. This same Tamuramaro is remembered in Aomori's annual Nebuta Matsuri which feature a number of gigantic, specially-constructed, illuminated paper floats. These great lantern-structures are colorfully painted with mythical figures; and teams of men carry them through the streets as crowds shout encouragement. This early ninth century military leader is commemorated in this way because he is said to have ordered huge illuminated lanterns to be placed at the top of hills; and when the curious Emishi approached these bright lights to investigate, they were captured and subdued by Tamuramaro's men.
Eras of Saga's reign.
The years of Saga's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name ("nengō").
Legacy.
In ancient Japan, there were four noble clans, the "Gempeitōkitsu" (源平藤橘). One of these clans, the Minamoto clan are also known as Genji (源氏), and of these, the Saga Genji (嵯峨源氏) are descended from 52nd emperor Saga. Saga's son, Minamoto no Tōru, is thought to be an inspiration for the protagonist of the novel "The Tale of Genji".
In the 9th century, Emperor Saga made a decree prohibiting meat consumption except fish and birds and abolished capital punishment in 818. This remained the dietary habit of Japanese until the introduction of European dietary customs in the 19th century.
Emperor Saga played an important role as a stalwart supporter of the Buddhist monk Kūkai. The emperor helped Kūkai to establish the Shingon School of Buddhism by granting him Tō-ji Temple in the capital Heian-kyō (present-day Kyoto).
Daikaku-ji.
 is a Shingon Buddhist temple in Ukyō-ku in Kyoto. The site was originally a residence of the emperor, and later various emperor conducted their cloistered rule from here. The artificial lake of the temple, Ōsawa Pond, is one of the oldest Japanese garden ponds to survive from the Heian period.
The "Saga Go-ryū" school of "ikebana" has its headquarters in the temple and is named in his honour.
Kugyō.
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.
In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Saga's reign (809–823), this "kugyō" included:
Consorts and children.
Saga had 49 children with at least 30 different women. Many of the children received the surname Minamoto, thereby removing them from royal succession.
Empress: Tachibana no Kachiko (橘嘉智子), also known as , Tachibana no Kiyotomo's daughter.
"Hi" (deposed): Imperial Princess Takatsu (高津内親王; d. 841), Emperor Kanmu’s daughter
"Hi": Tajihi no Takako (多治比高子; 787–825), Tajihi no Ujimori's daughter
"Bunin": Fujiwara no Onatsu (藤原緒夏; d. 855), Fujiwara no Uchimaro's daughter
Court lady ("Naishi-no-kami"): Kudara no Kyomyō (百済王慶命; d. 849), Kudara no Kyōshun's daughter
"Nyōgo": Kudara no Kimyō (百済貴命; d. 851), Kudara no Shuntetsu's daughter
"Nyōgo": Ōhara no Kiyoko (大原浄子; d. 841), Ōhara no Ietsugu's daughter
"Koui": Iidaka no Yakatoji (飯高宅刀自), Iidaka Gakuashi
"Koui": Akishino no Koko (秋篠高子/康子), Akishino no Yasuhito's daughter
"Koui": Yamada no Chikako (山田近子)
"Nyōgo": Princess Katano (交野女王), Prince Yamaguchi's daughter
Court lady: Takashina no Kawako (高階河子), Takashina no Kiyoshina's daughter
Court lady: Hiroi no Otona's daughter
Court lady: Fuse no Musashiko (布勢武蔵子)
Court lady: Kamitsukeno clan’s daughter
Court lady: Abe no Yanatsu's daughter
Court lady: Kasa no Tsugiko (笠継子), Kasa no Nakamori's daughter
Court lady: Awata clan's daughter
Court lady: Ōhara no Matako (大原全子), Ōhara no Mamuro's daughter
Court lady: Ki clan's daughter
Court lady: Kura no Kageko (内蔵影子)
Court lady: Kannabi no Iseko (甘南備伊勢子)
Court lady: Fun'ya no Fumiko (文屋文子), Fun'ya no Kugamaro's daughter
Court lady: Tanaka clan's daughter
Court lady: Koreyoshi no Sadamichi's daughter
Court lady: Ōnakatomi no Mineko (大中臣峯子)
Court lady: Tachibana no Haruko (橘春子)
Court lady: Nagaoka no Okanari's daughter
Court lady ("Nyoju"): Taima no Osadamaro's daughter
Lady-in-waiting: Sugawara Kanshi (菅原閑子)
References.
嵯峨山上
External links.
 

