
Epsilon (, ; uppercase ', lowercase ' or lunate ; ) is the fifth letter of the Greek alphabet, corresponding phonetically to a . In the system of Greek numerals it also has the value five. It was derived from the Phoenician letter He . Letters that arose from epsilon include the Roman E, Ë and Ɛ, and Cyrillic Е, È, Ё, Є and Э.
The name of the letter was originally (), but the name was changed to ("e psilon" "simple e") in the Middle Ages to distinguish the letter from the digraph , a former diphthong that had come to be pronounced the same as epsilon.
The uppercase form of epsilon looks identical to Latin E but has its own code point in Unicode: . The lowercase version has two typographical variants, both inherited from medieval Greek handwriting. One, the most common in modern typography and inherited from medieval minuscule, looks like a reversed number "3" and is encoded . The other, also known as lunate or uncial epsilon and inherited from earlier uncial writing, looks like a semicircle crossed by a horizontal bar: it is encoded . While in normal typography these are just alternative font variants, they may have different meanings as mathematical symbols: computer systems therefore offer distinct encodings for them. In TeX, codice_1 ( formula_1 ) denotes the lunate form, while codice_2 ( formula_2 ) denotes the reversed-3 form.
There is also a 'Latin epsilon', or "open e", which looks similar to the Greek lowercase epsilon. It is encoded in Unicode as and and is used as an IPA phonetic symbol. The lunate or uncial epsilon provided inspiration for the euro sign, .
The lunate epsilon, , is not to be confused with the set membership symbol ; nor should the Latin uppercase epsilon, , be confused with the Greek uppercase (sigma). The symbol formula_3, first used in set theory and logic by Giuseppe Peano and now used in mathematics in general for set membership ("belongs to") evolved from the letter epsilon, since the symbol was originally used as an abbreviation for the Latin word "est". In addition, mathematicians often read the symbol as "element of", as in "1 is an element of the natural numbers" for formula_4, for example. As late as 1960, ε itself was used for set membership, while its negation "does not belong to" (now ) was denoted by (epsilon prime). Only gradually did a fully separate, stylized symbol take the place of epsilon in this role. In a related context, Peano also introduced the use of a backwards epsilon, , for the phrase "such that", although the abbreviation "s.t." is occasionally used in place of ϶ in informal cardinals.
History.
Origin.
The letter Ε was taken over from the Phoenician letter He () when Greeks first adopted alphabetic writing. In archaic Greek writing, its shape is often still identical to that of the Phoenician letter. Like other Greek letters, it could face either leftward or rightward (), depending on the current writing direction, but, just as in Phoenician, the horizontal bars always faced in the direction of writing. Archaic writing often preserves the Phoenician form with a vertical stem extending slightly below the lowest horizontal bar. In the classical era, through the influence of more cursive writing styles, the shape was simplified to the current E glyph.
Sound value.
While the original pronunciation of the Phoenician letter "He" was , the earliest Greek sound value of Ε was determined by the vowel occurring in the Phoenician letter name, which made it a natural choice for being reinterpreted from a consonant symbol to a vowel symbol denoting an sound. Besides its classical Greek sound value, the short phoneme, it could initially also be used for other -like sounds. For instance, in early Attic before c. 500 BC, it was used also both for the long, open , and for the long close . In the former role, it was later replaced in the classic Greek alphabet by Eta (Η), which was taken over from eastern Ionic alphabets, while in the latter role it was replaced by the digraph spelling ΕΙ.
Epichoric alphabets.
Some dialects used yet other ways of distinguishing between various e-like sounds.
In Corinth, the normal function of Ε to denote and was taken by a glyph resembling a pointed B (), while Ε was used only for long close . The letter Beta, in turn, took the deviant shape .
In Sicyon, a variant glyph resembling an X () was used in the same function as Corinthian .
In Thespiai (Boeotia), a special letter form consisting of a vertical stem with a single rightward-pointing horizontal bar () was used for what was probably a raised variant of in pre-vocalic environments. This tack glyph was used elsewhere also as a form of "Heta", i.e. for the sound .
Glyph variants.
After the establishment of the canonical classical Ionian (Eucleidean) Greek alphabet, new glyph variants for Ε were introduced through handwriting. In the uncial script (used for literary papyrus manuscripts in late antiquity and then in early medieval vellum codices), the "lunate" shape () became predominant. In cursive handwriting, a large number of shorthand glyphs came to be used, where the cross-bar and the curved stroke were linked in various ways. Some of them resembled a modern lowercase Latin "e", some a "6" with a connecting stroke to the next letter starting from the middle, and some a combination of two small "c"-like curves. Several of these shapes were later taken over into minuscule book hand. Of the various minuscule letter shapes, the inverted-3 form became the basis for lower-case Epsilon in Greek typography during the modern era.
Uses.
International Phonetic Alphabet.
Despite its pronunciation as , in the International Phonetic Alphabet, the Latin epsilon represents open-mid front unrounded vowel, as in the English word "pet" .
Symbol.
The uppercase Epsilon is not commonly used outside of the Greek language because of its similarity to the Latin letter E. However, it is commonly used in structural mechanics with Young's Modulus equations for calculating tensile, compressive and areal strain.
The Greek lowercase epsilon , the lunate epsilon symbol , or the Latin lowercase epsilon (see above) is used in a variety of places:
Unicode.
These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.

