
 (August 827 – 7 October 858) was the 55th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.
Montoku's reign lasted from 850 to 858.
Traditional narrative.
Before Montoku's ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name ("imina") was . He was also known as "Tamura-no-mikado" or "Tamura-tei".
He was the eldest son of Emperor Ninmyō. His mother was Empress Dowager Fujiwara no Junshi (also called the Gojō empress 五条后), daughter of the minister of the left, Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu.
Montoku had six Imperial consorts and 29 Imperial children.
Events of Montoku's life.
Events during his reign included the repression of insurrections among the Ebisu people in Mutsu Province in 855, and among the people of the island of Tsushima two years later.
The actual site of Montoku's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine ("misasagi") at Kyoto.
The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Montoku's mausoleum. It is formally named "Tamura no misasagi".
Kugyō.
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.– "kugyō" of Montoku-tennō (in French)
In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Montoku's reign, this apex of the "Daijō-kan" included:
Eras of Montoku's reign.
The years of Montoku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or "nengō".
Consorts and children.
Consort (Nyōgo) (Tai-Kotaigō): Fujiwara no Akirakeiko (藤原明子; 829–899), also known as Somedono-no-Kisaki, Fujiwara no Yoshifusa’s daughter.
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no "Koshi"/Furuko (藤原古子), Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no Takakiko (藤原多賀幾子; d. 858), Fujiwara no Yoshimi's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Princess Azumako (東子女王; d. 865)
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no "Nenshi"/Toshiko (藤原年子)
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no Koreko (藤原是子)
Consort (Nyōgo): Tachibana no Fusako (橘房子), Tachibana no Ujikimi's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Tachibana no "Chushi" (橘忠子), Tachibana no Ujikimi's daughter
Consort (Koui): Ki no Shizuko (紀静子; d. 866), Ki no Natora's daughter
Court lady: Shigeno no Okuko (滋野奥子), Shigeno no Sadanushi's daughter
Court lady: Fujiwara no "Konshi"/Imako (藤原今子), Fujiwara no Sadamori's daughter
Court lady: Fujiwara no "Retsushi" (藤原列子), Fujiwara no Koreo's daughter
Court lady: Shigeno no Mineko (滋野岑子), Shigeno no Sadao's daughter
Court lady: Tomo clan's daughter
Court lady: Fuse clan's daughter
Court lady: Tajihi clan's daughter
Court lady: Kiyohara clan's daughter
Court lady: Sugawara clan's daughter
References.
 

