
Tanzania's first president, Julius Nyerere also was one of the founding members of the Non-Aligned Movement, and, during the Cold War era, Tanzania played an important role in regional and international organisations, such as the Non-Aligned Movement, the front-line states, the G-77, and the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) (now the African Union). One of Africa's best-known elder statesmen, Nyerere was personally active in many of these organisations, and served chairman of the OAU (1984–85) and chairman of six front-line states concerned with eliminating apartheid in Southern Africa. Nyerere was also involved with peace negotiations in Burundi until his death. Nyerere's death, on 14 October 1999, is still commemorated annually.
Tanzania, officially known as the "United Republic of Tanzania", enjoys good relations with its neighbours in the region and in recent years has been an active participant in efforts to promote the peaceful resolution of disputes. Tanzania is helping to broker peace talks to end conflict in Burundi and supports the Lusaka agreement concerning the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In March 1996, Tanzania, Uganda, and Kenya revived discussion of economic and regional cooperation. These talks culminated with the signing of an East African Cooperation Treaty in September 1999, which should in time lead to economic integration through the development of the East African Community. Tanzania is the only country in East Africa which also is a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).
Historically, Tanzania has played an active role in hosting refugees from neighbouring countries including Mozambique, DR Congo, Burundi, and Rwanda. This normally has been done in partnership with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
International organisation participation.
AU, ACP, AfDB, C, EAC, EADB, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MONUC, NAM, OAU, OPCW, PMAESA SADC, United Nations (see Permanent Representative of Tanzania to the United Nations), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTO
Tanzania and the Commonwealth of Nations.
Tanzania has been a Commonwealth republic since 1964, when the Republic of Tanganyika and the People's Republic of Zanzibar and Pemba united after the Zanzibar Revolution.

