
Flower Pot Men was a British children's programme, produced by BBC television, first transmitted in 1952, and repeated regularly for more than twenty years. A reboot of the show called Bill and Ben was produced in 2001.
Original series.
Originally, the programme was part of a BBC children's television series titled "Watch with Mother", featuring a different programme each weekday, most of them involving string puppets. The "Flower Pot Men" was the story of Bill and Ben, two little men made of flower pots who lived at the bottom of an English suburban garden. The characters were devised by Freda Lingstrom and Maria Bird in the 1950s. These characters should not be confused for another set of Bill and Ben characters featured on Lingstrom's earlier radio show "Listen with Mother", initially broadcast in 1950. Rights to the stories were later sold to Ben Productions, successfully transferring the radio programme to television. The puppeteers were Audrey Atterbury and Molly Gibson. The voices and other noises were produced by Peter Hawkins, Gladys Whitred and Julia Williams. The narration in all episodes was done by Maria Bird.
The plot changed little in each episode and always took place in a garden, behind a potting shed. A third character, Little Weed, of indeterminate species resembling either a sunflower or a dandelion with a smiling face, was shown growing between two large flowerpots. The three were also sometimes visited by a tortoise called Slowcoach and, in one particular episode, the trio met a faintly mysterious character made out of potatoes, Dan the potato man. Typically, while the "man who worked in the garden" would be away eating lunch, the two Flower Pot Men, Bill and Ben, would emerge from their pots. After a minor adventure, a slight mishap would occur, for which someone would then take the blame: "Which of these two flower pot men, was it Bill or was it Ben?" the narrator would trill in a quavering soprano; the culprit would then confess, before the gardener's footsteps would be heard coming up the garden path; the Flower Pot Men then would vanish into their pots and the "Goodbye" screen would appear. The final punch-line was, "..and I think the little house knew something about it; don't you?".
The Flower Pot Men spoke their own, highly inflected version of English, called Oddle Poddle, invented by prolific voice artist Peter Hawkins (who also provided speech for the daleks in "Doctor Who" and "Captain Pugwash"). "Ickle-kickle", for instance, was an icicle and Ben would say "Flobabdob!". At the end of each adventure, they would say bye-bye to each other and to the Little Weed – "Babap, Ickle Weed!" – to which the Weed would inevitably reply, with tremulous cadence, "Weeeeeeeeeeed!". This language, like that of the Teletubbies' in 1997, was criticised for hindering children from learning proper English.
2001 reboot.
On 4 January 2001, a reboot named "Bill and Ben" began on CBBC on BBC Two, this time involving stop-motion animation, 35mm film style and full colour, and made by Cosgrove Hall Films with a team of ten animators. This reboot features the voices of John Thomson (who also serves as the narrator), Jimmy Hibbert, and Eve Karpf. The series aired in the Republic of Ireland on RTEjr and formerly aired on CBeebies in 2002–2008.
Many additions were implemented:
Comics.
The show was the basis for a comic strip of the same name in the children's magazine "Robin".
Controversy.
The programme is unrelated to another set of characters called Bill and Ben, which have been confused with the "Flower Pot Men," including in the initial versions of two obituaries of retired headteacher Hilda Brabban, published in "The Independent" and BBC's in-house magazine "Ariel" respectively, and also in "Bills", a 2004 episode of the BBC panel show "QI" hosted by Stephen Fry. All three sources later corrected their statements. Brabban sold three stories about a Bill and Ben to the BBC in the 1950's; but other than their names, they bore no resemblance to the Flower Pot Men. Brabban's stories were broadcast on the radio programme "Listen with Mother" in 1951; the Bill and Ben of the Flower Pot Men were first seen on the television programme "Watch with Mother" in 1952. Both programmes were produced by Freda Lingstrom. During her later life Brabban suffered a stroke and later maintained she did invent the characters used in the BBC series; this prompted lawyers, acting on behalf of the estate of the show's creator, Freda Lingstrom, to threaten Brabban with litigation if she appeared on television to propagate this claim.

