
In mathematics, a filter is a special subset of a partially ordered set. Filters appear in order and lattice theory, but can also be found in topology, from where they originate. The dual notion of a filter is an order ideal.
Filters were introduced by Henri Cartan in 1937 and subsequently used by Bourbaki in their book "Topologie Générale" as an alternative to the similar notion of a net developed in 1922 by E. H. Moore and H. L. Smith.
Motivation.
Intuitively, a filter in a partially ordered set ("poset"), "P", is a subset of "P" that includes as members those elements that are large enough to satisfy some given criterion. For example, if "x" is an element of the poset, then the set of elements that are above "x" is a filter, called the principal filter at "x". (If "x" and "y" are incomparable elements of the poset, then neither of the principal filters at "x" and "y" is contained in the other one, and conversely.)
Similarly, a filter on a set contains those subsets that are sufficiently large to contain some given "thing". For example, if the set is the real line and "x" is one of its points, then the family of sets that include "x" in their interior is a filter, called the filter of neighbourhoods of "x". The "thing" in this case is slightly larger than "x", but it still doesn't contain any other specific point of the line.
The above interpretations explain conditions 1 and 3 in the section General definition: Clearly the empty set is not "large enough", and clearly the collection of "large enough" things should be "upward-closed". However, they do not really, without elaboration, explain condition 2 of the general definition. For, why should two "large enough" things contain a "common" "large enough" thing?
Alternatively, a filter can be viewed as a "locating scheme": When trying to locate something (a point or a subset) in the space "X", call a filter the collection of subsets of "X" that might contain "what is looked for". Then this "filter" should possess the following natural structure:
An ultrafilter can be viewed as a "perfect locating scheme" where "each" subset "E" of the space "X" can be used in deciding whether "what is looked for" might lie in "E".
From this interpretation, compactness (see the mathematical characterization below) can be viewed as the property that "no location scheme can end up with nothing", or, to put it another way, "always something will be found".
The mathematical notion of filter provides a precise language to treat these situations in a rigorous and general way, which is useful in analysis, general topology and logic.
General definition: Filter on a partially ordered set.
A subset of a partially ordered set is a filter if the following conditions hold:
A filter is proper if it is not equal to the whole set .
This condition is sometimes added to the definition of a filter.
While the above definition is the most general way to define a filter for arbitrary posets, it was originally defined for lattices only. In this case, the above definition can be characterized by the following equivalent statement:
A subset of a lattice is a filter, if and only if it is a non-empty upper set that is closed under finite infima (or meets), i.e., for all , it is also the case that is in "F".
A subset of is a filter basis if the upper set generated by is all of . Note that every filter is its own basis.
The smallest filter that contains a given element is a principal filter and is a principal element in this situation.
The principal filter for is just given by the set formula_1 and is denoted by prefixing with an upward arrow: 
The dual notion of a filter, i.e. the concept obtained by reversing all and exchanging ∧ with ∨, is ideal.
Because of this duality, the discussion of filters usually boils down to the discussion of ideals.
Hence, most additional information on this topic (including the definition of maximal filters and prime filters) is to be found in the article on ideals.
There is a separate article on ultrafilters.
Filter on a set.
Definition of a filter.
There are two competing definitions of a "filter on a set," both of which require that a filter be a "dual ideal". 
One definition defines "filter" as a synonym of "dual ideal" while the other defines "filter" to mean a dual ideal that is also "proper". 
Given a set , a canonical partial ordering can be defined on the powerset by subset inclusion, turning into a lattice. 
A "dual ideal" is just a filter with respect to this partial ordering. 
Note that if then there is exactly one dual ideal on , which is . 
Filter definition 1: Dual ideal.
The article uses the following definition of "filter on a set."
Filter definition 2: Proper dual ideal.
The other definition of "filter on a set" is the original definition of a "filter" given by Henri Cartan, which required that a filter on a set be a dual ideal that does "not" contain the empty set: 
The only non-proper filter on is . 
Much mathematical literature, especially that related to Topology, defines "filter" to mean a "non-degenerate" dual ideal.
Filter bases, subbases, and comparison.
A subset of is called a prefilter, filter base, or filter basis if is non-empty and the intersection of any two members of is a superset of some member(s) of . 
If the empty set is not a member of , we say is a proper filter base.
Given a filter base , the filter generated or spanned by is defined as the minimum filter containing . 
It is the family of all those subsets of which are supersets of some member(s) of . 
Every filter is also a filter base, so the process of passing from filter base to filter may be viewed as a sort of completion.
For every subset of there is a smallest (possibly nonproper) filter containing , called the filter generated or spanned by .
Similarly as for a filter spanned by a "filter base", a filter spanned by a "subset" is the minimum filter containing .
It is constructed by taking all finite intersections of , which then form a filter base for . 
This filter is proper if and only if every finite intersection of elements of is non-empty, and in that case we say that is a filter subbase. 
If and are two filter bases on , one says is finer than (or that is a refinement of ) if for each , there is a such that . 
If also is finer than , one says that they are equivalent filter bases.
Filters in model theory.
For every filter "F" on a set "S", the set function defined by
is finitely additive — a "measure" if that term is construed rather loosely. Therefore, the statement
can be considered somewhat analogous to the statement that formula_14 holds "almost everywhere". 
That interpretation of membership in a filter is used (for motivation, although it is not needed for actual "proofs") in the theory of ultraproducts in model theory, a branch of mathematical logic.
Filters in topology.
In topology and analysis, filters are used to define convergence in a manner similar to the role of sequences in a metric space.
In topology and related areas of mathematics, a filter is a generalization of a net. Both nets and filters provide very general contexts to unify the various notions of limit to arbitrary topological spaces.
A sequence is usually indexed by the natural numbers, which are a totally ordered set. Thus, limits in first-countable spaces can be described by sequences. 
However, if the space is not first-countable, nets or filters must be used. Nets generalize the notion of a sequence by requiring the index set simply be a directed set. 
Filters can be thought of as sets built from multiple nets. 
Therefore, both the limit of a filter and the limit of a net are conceptually the same as the limit of a sequence.
Neighbourhood bases.
Let "X" be a topological space and "x" a point of "X".
Convergent filter bases.
Let "X" be a topological space and "x" a point of "X".
Indeed:
(i) implies (ii): if "F" is a filter base satisfying the properties of (i), then the filter associated to "F" satisfies the properties of (ii).
(ii) implies (iii): if "U" is any open neighborhood of "x" then by the definition of convergence "U" contains an element of "F"; since also "Y" is an element of "F", 
"U" and "Y" have non-empty intersection.
(iii) implies (i): Define formula_15. Then "F" is a filter base satisfying the properties of (i).
Clustering.
Let be a topological space and "x" a point of "X".
Properties of a topological space.
Let "X" be a topological space.
Functions between topological spaces.
Let and be topological spaces, let be a filter base on , and let be a function. 
The image of under , denoted by , is defined as the set }, which necessarily forms a filter base on . 
Cauchy filters.
Let formula_16 be a metric space.

