
Gary Wayne Coleman (February 8, 1968 – May 28, 2010) was an American actor, comedian, and writer. One of the highest-paid child actors in the late 1970s and early 1980s, he was rated first on a list of VH1's "100 Greatest Kid Stars" and received several accolades throughout his career, including two Young Artist Awards and four People's Choice Awards.
Coleman was best known for his role as Arnold Jackson in the sitcom "Diff'rent Strokes" (1978–1986), for which he received the Young Artist Award for Best Young Actor in a Comedy Series. He was the star of the animated show "The Gary Coleman Show" (1982) where he voiced Andy LeBeau, and also voiced Kevin in the animated show "Waynehead" (1996–1997). He made his film debut with "On the Right Track" (1981); his other films include starring in the comedies "Jimmy the Kid" and "The Kid with the Broken Halo" (both released in 1982), the cult film "Dirty Work" (1998), and appearing in the satirical-comedy film "An American Carol" (2008) and the independent film "Midgets vs. Mascots" (2009). He also starred in the video games "The Curse of Monkey Island" (1997) and the cult game "Postal 2" (2003). 
Despite having a successful acting career, Coleman struggled financially in later life. In 1989, he successfully sued his parents and business adviser over misappropriation of his assets, only to declare bankruptcy a decade later. On May 28, 2010, Coleman died due to an epidural hematoma.
Life and career.
Early life and breakthrough with "Diff'rent Strokes".
Gary Wayne Coleman was born in Zion, Illinois, on February 8, 1968. He was adopted by W. G. Coleman, a fork-lift operator, and Edmonia Sue, a nurse practitioner. Due to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, a congenital kidney disease, and the corticosteroids and other medications used to treat it, his growth was limited to , and his face kept a childlike appearance even into adulthood. He underwent two unsuccessful kidney transplants in 1973 and again in 1984, and required frequent dialysis. In 1974, Coleman's career began when he appeared in a commercial for Harris Bank. His line (after the announcer said, "You should have a Harris banker") was "You should have a Hubert doll." "Hubert" was a stuffed lion representing the Harris bank logo. The same year, he appeared in an episode of "Medical Center". Coleman had appeared on "The Jeffersons" as Raymond, George Jefferson's nephew, and on "Good Times" in 1978 as Penny's friend Gary. 
In 1977, Coleman appeared in a 1977 pilot for a revival of "The Little Rascals" as Stymie, which ultimately ended up not getting picked up as a series. His work on the "Little Rascals" pilot caught the attention of an executive, and in 1978 Coleman was cast as Arnold Jackson in "Diff'rent Strokes", playing one of two Black brothers from Harlem adopted by a wealthy white widower in Manhattan. After the premiere, "Diff'rent Strokes" became a hit, and ran for 8 seasons, ending in 1986. Coleman received recognition and praise for his work on the show; for his role he received five Young Artist Award nominations, of which he won two, and won the People's Choice Awards for Favorite Young TV Performer four years in a row, from 1980 to 1983. At the height of his fame on "Diff'rent Strokes", he earned $100,000 per episode, and he became known by his character's catchphrase "What'chu talkin' 'bout, Willis?", uttered skeptically in response to statements by Todd Bridges, who portrayed his character's brother Willis. According to Bridges' autobiography "Killing Willis", Coleman was made to work long hours on the set of "Diff'rent Strokes" despite his age and health problems, which contributed to his being unhappy and separating himself from the rest of the cast.
Coleman became a popular figure, known for his presence and personality. Along with his work on "Diff'rent Strokes", Coleman began working in films, first appearing in the baseball comedy television film "The Kid from Left Field" in 1979. In that same year, he made a guest appearance on the science-fiction show "Buck Rogers in the 25th Century" as a time-displaced whiz kid named Hieronymous Fox; a role he would reprise in a later episode in Season 2 of the series (in 1980). In 1981, he made his feature film debut with the comedy "On the Right Track", headlining as Lester, a young shoeshine boy who achieves fame for having a talent for gambling on horses. The film was received with mixed reviews, with critics stating that the film rode nearly entirely on Coleman's credibility and presence; however, the film was a commercial success, and his performance was praised. In the year following, Coleman starred in "Jimmy the Kid" (1982). The film was financially successful, but received resoundingly negative reviews, with critic Roger Ebert writing "... movies like this don't really have room for brilliant performances. They're written by formula, cast by computer and directed by the book, and when a little spontaneity creeps in, it seems out of place." In the same year, he starred in the television film "The Kid with the Broken Halo". The film served as the basis for "The Gary Coleman Show" in 1982, where Coleman had the lead voice role as Andy LeBeau, an angel in training who comes to earth to help others and gain his wings.
Career fluctuations, financial struggles and legal issues.
A Biography Channel documentary estimated that Coleman was left with a quarter of the original amount of money he retrieved from his years on "Diff'rent Strokes" after paying his parents, advisers, lawyers, and taxes. He later successfully sued his parents and his former advisers for misappropriation of his finances and was awarded $1.3 million. In 1989, Coleman sued his adoptive parents and former business advisor for $3.8 million for misappropriating his trust fund and won a $1.28 million judgment in 1993. In a 1993 television interview, Coleman said he had twice attempted suicide by overdosing on pills. Coleman voiced the role in the animated show "Waynehead", where he voiced Kevin, which ran from 1996 to 1997. He also voiced Kenny Falmouth in the video game "The Curse of Monkey Island" in 1997, which gained him attention, being one of the first few widescale actors to appear in a video game. Coleman was also an avid railroad fan, and to support his fluctuating career, he worked part-time at Denver-area, Tucson-area, and California hobby stores to be around his hobby. Coleman built and maintained miniature railroads in his homes in several states throughout the 1990s. Currently, at least one of Coleman's model railroads is being preserved in Colorado Springs, Colorado.
In 1998, Coleman was charged with assault while working as a security guard. Tracy Fields, a Los Angeles bus driver and fan of Coleman's work on "Diff'rent Strokes", approached him in a California mall and requested his autograph, while Coleman was shopping for a bulletproof vest. When Coleman refused to give her an autograph, an argument ensued, and Fields reportedly mocked Coleman's lackluster career as an actor. Coleman then punched Fields in the face several times in front of witnesses. He was arrested and later testified in court that she threatened him, and he defended himself. "She wouldn't leave me alone. I was getting scared, and she was getting ugly," he said. Coleman pleaded no contest to one count of assault, received a suspended jail sentence, and was ordered to pay Fields' $1,665 hospital bill and to take anger management classes. In August 1999, Coleman filed for bankruptcy protection. Multiple people, he said, were responsible for his insolvency, "from me, to accountants, to my adoptive parents, to agents, to lawyers, and back to me again". He lost $200,000 on an arcade he named the Gary Coleman Game Parlor, which was located at Fisherman's Village in Marina del Rey, California. Ongoing medical expenses contributed significantly to Coleman's chronic financial problems and compelled him, at times, to resort to unusual fundraising activities. In 1999, he partnered with UGO Networks on an online auction titled "Save Me!". Items included his couch, a "tiny pimp suit" with matching gold Nikes and an autographed ice scraper. Items attracted more than $5,000 in bids.
Career resurgence, marriage and later years.
In 2003, Coleman portrayed a fictional version of himself in the video game "Postal 2" (2003). The second game in the Postal franchise, it received a cult following following its release, and brought Coleman much attention. In the same year, Coleman ventured into politics, and in the 2003 California recall election he was a candidate for governor. His campaign was sponsored by the free newsweekly "East Bay Express" as a satirical comment on the recall. After Arnold Schwarzenegger declared his candidacy, Coleman announced that he would vote for Schwarzenegger. Coleman placed 8th in a field of 135 candidates, receiving 14,242 votes. In 2005, Coleman appeared in John Cena's music video for his single "Bad, Bad Man" (from the album "You Can't See Me") and played himself as a villain taking Michael Jackson and Madonna hostage. The video was a spoof of 1980s culture, focusing on "The A-Team". Also in 2005, Coleman moved from Los Angeles to Santaquin, a small town about south of Salt Lake City, Utah, where he lived for the remainder of his life.
In early 2007, he met Shannon Price, 22, on the set of the film "Church Ball", where she was working as an extra. Price and Coleman married several months later. On May 1 and 2, 2008, they made a well-publicized appearance on the show "Divorce Court" to air their differences in an attempt to save their marriage. Nevertheless, they divorced in August 2008, and Coleman was granted an "ex parte" restraining order against Price to prevent her from living in his home when he was hospitalized after their divorce. According to a court petition later filed by Price, she and Coleman continued to live together in a common-law marriage until his death. However, a judge ultimately ruled against Price after hearing evidence that she carried on affairs with other men during the time she claimed to be with Coleman, and "physically abused Coleman in public, led him around by the hand like a child [and] displayed no physical affection toward him in front of anyone". In 2007, Coleman was cited for misdemeanor disorderly conduct in Provo, Utah, after a "heated discussion" in public with his wife.
In 2008, Coleman was involved in a car accident after an altercation at a Payson, Utah, bowling alley, which began when Colt Rushton, age 24, photographed Coleman without his permission. The two men argued, according to witnesses. In the parking lot, Coleman allegedly backed his truck into Rushton, striking his knee and pulling him under the vehicle, before hitting another car. Rushton was treated at a local hospital for minor injuries and released. Coleman later pleaded no contest to charges of disorderly conduct and reckless driving and was fined $100. In 2010, he settled a civil suit related to the incident for an undisclosed amount. In 2009, Coleman and his ex-wife were involved in a domestic dispute, after which Price was arrested on suspicion of domestic violence, and both parties were cited for disorderly conduct. In January 2010, months before his death, Coleman was arrested on an outstanding domestic assault warrant in Santaquin, booked into the Utah County Jail, and released the following day. Coleman's final television role was a voice role in the animated-series "Robot Chicken". His final film roles were starring as Charles Higgins in the sports comedy film "Church Ball" (2006), appearing as a slave in the satirical comedy film "An American Carol" (2008), and appearing as Gary in the comedy film "Midgets vs. Mascots" (2009).
Death.
Very few details of Coleman's medical history have been made public. His short stature () stemmed from congenital kidney disease and its treatment. He underwent at least two unsuccessful kidney transplants early in his life and required frequent dialysis, which he preferred not to discuss. In 2009, Coleman underwent heart surgery, details of which were never made public, but he is known to have developed pneumonia postoperatively. In January 2010, Coleman was hospitalized after a seizure in Los Angeles, and in February, he suffered another seizure on the set of "The Insider" television program. On May 26, 2010, Coleman was admitted to Utah Valley Regional Medical Center in Provo, Utah, in critical condition after falling down the stairs at his home in Santaquin and hitting his head, possibly after another seizure, and suffering an epidural hematoma. According to a hospital spokesman, Coleman was conscious and lucid the next morning, but his condition subsequently worsened. By mid-afternoon on May 27, he was unconscious and on life support. He died at 12:05 pm MDT (18:05 UTC) on May 28, 2010, at age 42.
The weekend after Coleman's death, a scheduled funeral was postponed and later canceled due to a dispute regarding the disposition of his estate and remains among Coleman's adoptive parents, former business associate Anna Gray, and Price. Coleman's former manager, Dion Mial, was involved initially but withdrew after Coleman's 1999 will, which named Mial as executor and directed that his wake be "...conducted by those with no financial ties to me and can look each other in the eyes and say they really cared personally for Gary Coleman", turned out to have been superseded by a later one replacing Mial with Gray, and directing "...that there be no funeral service, wake, or other ceremony memorializing my passing". Questions were also raised as to whether Price, who approved discontinuing Coleman's life support, was legally authorized to do so. The controversy was exacerbated by a photograph published on the front page of the tabloid newspaper "Globe" depicting Price posed next to a comatose, intubated Coleman, under the headline, "It Was Murder!"
The hospital later issued a statement confirming that Coleman had completed an advance healthcare directive granting Price permission to make medical decisions on his behalf. An investigation by Santaquin police was closed on October 5, 2010, after the medical examiner ruled Coleman's death accidental, and no evidence of wrongdoing could be demonstrated. While Coleman's final will, signed in 2005, named Gray as executor and awarded his entire estate to her, Coleman and Price married in 2007. Although they divorced in 2008, Price claimed in a court petition that she remained Coleman's common-law wife, with the two sharing bank accounts, and the couple presenting themselves publicly as husband and wife until Coleman's death. Her assertion, if validated by the court, would have made her his lawful heir.
In May 2012, Judge James Taylor stated that while Price had indeed lived in Coleman's home after their marriage ended, their relationship at the time of his death failed to meet Utah's standard for a common-law marriage. The disposition of his ashes remains unreported. Price said, were she granted disposition, she would scatter the ashes at the Golden Spike National Historic Site in Utah as a tribute to Coleman's lifelong love of trains.
Impact and influence.
Coleman is frequently listed as one of the most influential child actors in the world. He was rated first on a list of VH1's "100 Greatest Kid Stars" on television, and was noted by MTV for having an "Undeniable Impact on Pop Culture." Mike Hogan from Vanity Fair wrote on his career, saying "He was unquestionably a superstar, overshadowing them with his radiant charisma and boundless energy, but the kidney condition that enabled him, even as a teen, to play the world’s most precocious little brother on TV also complicated his life in ways most of us will never understand." Randy Kester – Coleman's attorney – told Dallas News in 2010, "The world's going to be a little less happy place without Gary. For being a small guy, he sure had a big impact on the world."
Filk music act Ookla the Mok paid tribute to Coleman on their 2003 album "oh ok LA" with the song "A.M. Suicide". The tune starts out as a lament of Coleman's then-career as a security guard but peaks with the existential earworm "There's a little Gary Coleman inside us all!"
Coleman is parodied in "Avenue Q", which won the 2004 Tony Award for Best Musical. A fictionalized version of Coleman works as the superintendent of the apartment complex where the musical takes place. In the song "It Sucks to Be Me", he laments his fate. On Broadway, the role was originally performed by Natalie Venetia Belcon. The show's creators, Jeff Marx and Robert Lopez, have said the Coleman character personifies one of "Avenue Q" central themes: that as children we are told we are "special", but upon entering adulthood, we discover that life is not nearly as easy as we have been led to believe. They added that their original intent was for Coleman himself to play the Gary Coleman role, and he expressed interest in accepting it but did not show up for a meeting scheduled to discuss it. In 2005, Coleman announced his intention to sue the producers of "Avenue Q" for their depiction of him, although the lawsuit never materialized. At the 2007 New York Comic Con, Coleman said, "I wish there was a lawyer on Earth that would sue them for me."
Following his death in 2010, the casts of the off-Broadway production of "Avenue Q" in New York City and the "Avenue Q" National Tour in Dallas dedicated their performances to his memory, and the actors playing the part of Coleman paid tribute to him from the stage at the performances' conclusions. The Coleman character remained in the show after modifications were made to relevant dialogue.
Works and accolades.
Filmography.
With a career spanning over 30 years, Coleman appeared in over 60 works, which consisted of feature films, television and video game appearances, and music videos. He also made appearances in various talk shows and reality shows. 
Awards and nominations.
Young Artist Awards
The Young Artist Awards, initially called the Youth in Film Awards, was created by the Young Artist Association, made to honor young performers, generally those under eighteen years of age. It was founded in 1979. Coleman received 5 nominations, of which he won 2.
People's Choice Awards
The People's Choice Awards is an awards ceremony held in honor of people in entertainment, and was founded in 1975. Coleman was nominated and won for four consecutive years.
TV Land Awards
The TV Land Awards is an awards ceremony that usually honors works that are now off-air or no longer in production, and was founded in 2003. Coleman was a part of two nominations given to the ensemble.
Golden Raspberry Awards
The Golden Raspberry Awards is a parody awards ceremony held to honor under-achievements in film. Coleman was nominated for two awards, of which he won none.

