
Kuwait is an emirate with an autocratic political system. The political system consists of an appointed judiciary, appointed government (dominated by the Al Sabah family), and nominally elected parliament.
Executive branch.
The Constitution of Kuwait was approved and promulgated in November 1962. 
Government.
The prime minister chooses the cabinet of ministers, which form the government. The prime minister is a member of the ruling family and is appointed by the Emir.
Emir.
The Emir's powers are defined by the 1961 constitution. These powers include appointing the prime minister, who in turn chooses the cabinet of ministers (government). Upon the death of the Emir, the crown prince succeeds.
Judicial branch.
The judiciary in Kuwait is not independent of the government, the Emir appoints all the judges and many judges are foreign nationals from Egypt. In each administrative district of Kuwait, there is a Summary Court (also called Courts of First Instance which are composed of one or more divisions, like a Traffic Court or an Administrative Court); then there is Court of Appeals; Cassation Court, and lastly - a Constitutional Court which interprets the constitution and deals with disputes related to the constitutionality of laws. Kuwait has a civil law legal system.
Legislative branch.
The National Assembly is theoretically the main legislative power in Kuwait, but its power is very limited and nominal. The National Assembly has the nominal power to remove government ministers from their post. MPs frequently exercise their constitutional right to interpellate government members. The National Assembly's interpellation sessions of ministers are aired on Kuwaiti TV. MPs also have the right to interpellate the prime minister, and then table a motion of non-cooperation with the government, in which case the cabinet must get replaced.
Gulf War.
During the 1990-1991 Gulf War, Saddam Hussein made Kuwait the 19th province of Iraq (known as Kuwait Governorate). As a result, Ali Hassan al-Majid became the governor and took over what was left of the original government.
VIP Flight.
The State of Kuwait operates several VIP jets used mainly by the Amir of Kuwait:

