
A gnome is a mythological creature and diminutive spirit in Renaissance magic and alchemy, first introduced by Paracelsus in the 16th century and later adopted by more recent authors including those of modern fantasy literature. Its characteristics have been reinterpreted to suit the needs of various story tellers, but it is typically said to be a small humanoid that lives underground.
Diminutive statues of gnomes introduced as lawn ornaments during the 19th century grew in popularity during the 20th century and came to be known as garden gnomes.
History.
Origins.
The word comes from Renaissance Latin "gnomus", which first appears in "A Book on Nymphs, Sylphs, Pygmies, and Salamanders, and on the Other Spirits" by Paracelsus, published posthumously in Nysa in 1566 (and again in the Johannes Huser edition of 1589–1591 from an autograph by Paracelsus).
The term may be an original invention of Paracelsus, possibly deriving the term from Latin "gēnomos" (itself representing a Greek , literally "earth-dweller"). In this case, the omission of the "ē" is, as the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) calls it, a blunder. Paracelsus uses "Gnomi" as a synonym of "Pygmæi" and classifies them as earth elementals. He describes them as two spans high, very reluctant to interact with humans, and able to move through solid earth as easily as humans move through air.
The chthonic, or earth-dwelling, spirit has precedents in numerous ancient and medieval mythologies, often guarding mines and precious underground treasures, notably in the Germanic dwarfs and the Greek Chalybes, Telchines or Dactyls.
In Romanticism and modern fairy tales.
The English word is attested from the early 18th century. Gnomes are used in Alexander Pope's "The Rape of the Lock". The creatures from this mock-epic are small, celestial creatures which were prudish women in their past lives, and now spend all of eternity looking out for prudish women (in parallel to the guardian angels in Catholic belief). Other uses of the term "gnome" remain obscure until the early 19th century, when it is taken up by authors of Romanticist collections of fairy tales and becomes mostly synonymous with the older word "goblin".
Pope's stated source, the French satire (by Nicolas-Pierre-Henri de Montfaucon de Villars, the abbot of Villars) "Comte de Gabalis" (1670) describes gnomes as such:
"The Earth is filled almost to the center with "Gnomes" or "Pharyes", a people of small stature, the guardians of treasures, of mines, and of precious stones. They are ingenious, friends of men, and easie (sic) to be commandded (sic). They furnish the children of the "Sages" with as much money, as they have need of; and never ask any other reward of their services, than the glory of being commanded. The "Gnomides" or wives of these "Gnomes" or "Pharyes", are little, but very handsom (sic); and their habit marvellously (sic) curious."
Villars used the term "gnomide" to refer to female gnomes (often "gnomid" in English translations). Modern fiction instead uses the word "gnomess" to refer to female gnomes.
In 19th-century fiction, the chthonic gnome became a sort of antithesis to the more airy or luminous fairy. Nathaniel Hawthorne in "Twice-Told Tales" (1837) contrasts the two in "Small enough to be king of the fairies, and ugly enough to be king of the gnomes" (cited after OED). Similarly, gnomes are contrasted to elves, as in William Cullen Bryant's "Little People of the Snow" (1877), which has "let us have a tale of elves that ride by night, with jingling reins, or gnomes of the mine" (cited after OED).
One of the first movements in Mussorgsky's 1874 work "Pictures at an Exhibition", named "Gnomus" (Latin for "The Gnome"), is written to sound as if a gnome is moving about, his movements constantly changing in speed.
Franz Hartmann in 1895 satirized materialism in an allegorical tale entitled "Unter den Gnomen im Untersberg". The English translation appeared in 1896 as "Among the Gnomes: An Occult Tale of Adventure in the Untersberg". In this story, the "Gnomes" are still clearly subterranean creatures, guarding treasures of gold within the Untersberg mountain.
As a figure of 19th-century fairy tales, the term gnome became largely synonymous with other terms for "little people" by the 20th century, such as "goblin", "brownie", "leprechaun" and other instances of the "domestic spirit" type, losing its strict association with earth or the underground world.
Cultural references.
Movies.
The 2018 animated movie Sherlock Gnomes featured a retelling of the story "Sherlock Holmes" featuring a cast of gnomish characters.
Derivative uses.
Garden gnomes.
After World War II (with early references, in ironic use, from the late 1930s) the diminutive figurines introduced as lawn ornaments during the 19th century came to be known as garden gnomes. The image of the gnome changed further during the 1960s to 1970s, when the first plastic garden gnomes were manufactured. These gnomes followed the style of the 1937 depiction of the seven dwarves in "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" by Disney. This "Disneyfied" image of the gnome was built upon by the illustrated children's book classic "The Secret Book of Gnomes" (1976), in the original Dutch "Leven en werken van de Kabouter". Garden gnomes share a resemblance to the Scandinavian tomte and nisse, and the Swedish term "tomte" can be translated as "gnome" in English.
Gnome-themed parks.
Several gnome themed entertainment parks exist. Notable ones are:
Gnome parades.
Gnome parades are held annually at Atlanta's Inman Park Festival. Numerous one-off gnome parades have been held, including in Savannah, Georgia (April 2012) and Cleveland, Ohio (May 2011).

