
In Norse mythology, Ginnungagap ("gaping abyss", "yawning void") is the primordial void, mentioned in the Gylfaginning, the Eddaic text recording Norse cosmogony.
Etymology.
"Ginnunga-" is usually interpreted as deriving from a verb meaning "gape" or "yawn", but no such word occurs in Old Norse except in verse 3 of the Eddic poem "Vǫluspá", "gap var ginnunga", which may be a play on the term. In her edition of the poem, Ursula Dronke suggested it was borrowed from Old High German "ginunga", as the term Múspell is believed to have been borrowed from Old High German. An alternative etymology links the "ginn-" prefix with that found in terms with a sacral meaning, such as "ginn-heilagr", "ginn-regin" (both referring to the gods) and "ginn-runa" (referring to the runes), thus interpreting "Ginnungagap" as signifying a "magical (and creative) power-filled space".
Creation myth.
Ginnungagap appears as the primordial void in the Norse creation account. The "Gylfaginning" states:
In the northern part of Ginnungagap lay the intense cold of Niflheim, and in the southern part lay the equally intense heat of Muspelheim. The cosmogonic process began when the effulgence of the two met in the middle of Ginnungagap.
Geographic rationalization.
Scandinavian cartographers from the early 15th century attempted to localise or identify Ginnungagap as a real geographic location from which the creation myth derived. A fragment from a 15th-century (pre-Columbus) Old Norse encyclopedic text entitled "Gripla" (Little Compendium) places Ginnungagap between Greenland and Vinland:
A scholion in a 15th-century manuscript of Adam of Bremen's "Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum" similarly refers to "Ghimmendegop" as the Norse word for the abyss in the far north.
Later, the 17th-century Icelandic bishop Guðbrandur Thorlaksson also used the name "Ginnungegap" to refer to a narrow body of water, possibly the Davis Strait, separating the southern tip of Greenland from "Estotelandia, pars America extrema", probably Baffin Island.
In popular culture.
Ginnungagap is featured in the Marvel Universe, as a void that existed before the formation of the world. In this place were formed entities such as the Elder Gods, Xian, Ennead, Frost Giants, Fire Demons, Nyx and Amatsu-Mikaboshi.
In the Netflix series Ragnarok, it is visited as camping site for a classroom field trip.
in Alastair Reynolds' space opera novel "Absolution Gap", the chasm in which the bridge spans is also named by the book's main antagonist.
Swedish death metal band, Amon Amarth and their 2001 album The Crusher features a track titled, "Fall Through Ginnungagap".
EVE Online has a black hole whose accretion disk shows up in the skybox named Ginnungagap.

