
The Republic of Palau consists of eight principal islands and more than 250 smaller ones lying roughly 500 miles southeast of the Philippines, in Oceania. The islands of Palau constitute the westernmost part of the Caroline Islands chain. The country includes the World War II battleground of Peleliu and world-famous rock islands. The total land area is . It has the 42nd largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .
Statistics.
The area of Palau is slightly more than 2.5 times the size of the US city of Washington, DC.
Maritime claims:
&lt;br&gt;"territorial sea:"
12 nautical miles
&lt;br&gt;"exclusive economic zone:"
 (200 nmi)
Elevation extremes:
&lt;br&gt;"lowest point:"
Pacific Ocean 0 m
&lt;br&gt;"highest point:"
Mount Ngerchelchauus (on Babeldaob)
Land use:
&lt;br&gt;"arable land:"
2.17%
&lt;br&gt;"permanent crops:"
4.35%
&lt;br&gt;"other:"
93.48% (2011)
Environment - international agreements:
&lt;br&gt;"party to:"
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Law of the Sea
Terrain varies geologically from the high, mountainous main island of Babeldaob to low, coral islands usually fringed by large barrier reefs. Natural resources consist of forests, minerals (especially gold), marine products, and deep-seabed minerals. Current environmental issues include inadequate facilities for disposal of solid waste; threats to the marine ecosystem from sand and coral dredging, illegal fishing practices, and overfishing.
Climate.
Climate is tropical; hot and humid. The country has a Köppen Climate Classification of "Af" (Tropical Rainforest Climate). The wet season lasts from May to November and typhoons can occur from June to December.
Relief.
The relief of the country varies from the hilly main island of Babeldaob to the low, coral islands, usually bordered by large barrier reefs. Average altitude - no data available; the lowest point is the water level of the Pacific Ocean (0 m); The highest point is Mount Ngerchelchuus (242 m).
Extreme points.
This is a list of the extreme points of Palau, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

