
In mathematics, the geometric algebra (GA) of a vector space with a quadratic form (usually the Euclidean metric or the Lorentz metric) is an algebra over a field, the Clifford algebra of a vector space with a quadratic form with its multiplication operation called the geometric product. The algebra elements are called multivectors, which contains both the scalars formula_1 and the vector space formula_2.
Clifford's contribution was to define a new product, the geometric product, that unified the Grassmann and Hamilton algebras into a single structure. Adding the dual of the Grassmann exterior product (the "meet") allows the use of the Grassmann–Cayley algebra, and a conformal version of the latter together with a conformal Clifford algebra yields a conformal geometric algebra (CGA) providing a framework for classical geometries. In practice, these and several derived operations allow a correspondence of elements, subspaces and operations of the algebra with geometric interpretations.
The scalars and vectors have their usual interpretation, and make up distinct subspaces of a GA. Bivectors provide a more natural representation of the pseudovector quantities in vector algebra such as oriented area, oriented angle of rotation, torque, angular momentum, electromagnetic field and the Poynting vector. A trivector can represent an oriented volume, and so on. An element called a blade may be used to represent a subspace of formula_2 and orthogonal projections onto that subspace. Rotations and reflections are represented as elements. Unlike vector algebra, a GA naturally accommodates any number of dimensions and any quadratic form such as in relativity.
Examples of geometric algebras applied in physics include the spacetime algebra (and the less common algebra of physical space) and the conformal geometric algebra. Geometric calculus, an extension of GA that incorporates differentiation and integration, can be used to formulate other theories such as complex analysis and differential geometry, e.g. by using the Clifford algebra instead of differential forms. Geometric algebra has been advocated, most notably by David Hestenes and Chris Doran, as the preferred mathematical framework for physics. Proponents claim that it provides compact and intuitive descriptions in many areas including classical and quantum mechanics, electromagnetic theory and relativity. GA has also found use as a computational tool in computer graphics and robotics.
The geometric product was first briefly mentioned by Hermann Grassmann, who was chiefly interested in developing the closely related exterior algebra. In 1878, William Kingdon Clifford greatly expanded on Grassmann's work to form what are now usually called Clifford algebras in his honor (although Clifford himself chose to call them "geometric algebras"). For several decades, geometric algebras went somewhat ignored, greatly eclipsed by the vector calculus then newly developed to describe electromagnetism. The term "geometric algebra" was repopularized in the 1960s by Hestenes, who advocated its importance to relativistic physics.
Definition and notation.
There are a number of different ways to define a geometric algebra. Hestenes's original approach was axiomatic, "full of geometric significance" and equivalent to the universal Clifford algebra.
Given a finite-dimensional quadratic space formula_2 over a field formula_1 with a symmetric bilinear form (the "inner product", e.g. the Euclidean or Lorentzian metric) formula_6, the geometric algebra for this quadratic space is the Clifford algebra formula_7. As usual in this domain, for the remainder of this article, only the real case, formula_8, will be considered. The notation formula_9 (respectively formula_10) will be used to denote a geometric algebra for which the bilinear form formula_11 has the signature formula_12 (respectively formula_13).
The essential product in the algebra is called the "geometric product", and the product in the contained exterior algebra is called the "exterior product" (frequently called the "wedge product" and less often the "outer product"). It is standard to denote these respectively by juxtaposition (i.e., suppressing any explicit multiplication symbol) and the symbol formula_14. The above definition of the geometric algebra is abstract, so we summarize the properties of the geometric product by the following set of axioms. The geometric product has the following properties, for formula_15:
The exterior product has the same properties, except that the last property above is replaced by formula_25 for formula_26.
Note that in the last property above, the real number formula_27 need not be nonnegative if formula_11 is not positive-definite. An important property of the geometric product is the existence of elements having a multiplicative inverse. For a vector formula_23, if formula_30 then formula_31 exists and is equal to formula_32. A nonzero element of the algebra does not necessarily have a multiplicative inverse. For example, if formula_33 is a vector in formula_2 such that formula_35, the element formula_36 is both a nontrivial idempotent element and a nonzero zero divisor, and thus has no inverse.
It is usual to identify formula_37 and formula_2 with their images under the natural embeddings formula_39 and formula_40. In this article, this identification is assumed. Throughout, the terms "scalar" and "vector" refer to elements of formula_37 and formula_2 respectively (and of their images under this embedding).
The geometric product.
For vectors formula_23 and formula_44, we may write the geometric product of any two vectors formula_23 and formula_44 as the sum of a symmetric product and an antisymmetric product:
Thus we can define the "inner product" of vectors as
so that the symmetric product can be written as
Conversely, formula_11 is completely determined by the algebra. The antisymmetric part is the exterior product of the two vectors, the product of the contained exterior algebra:
Then by simple addition:
The inner and exterior products are associated with familiar concepts from standard vector algebra. Geometrically, formula_23 and formula_44 are parallel if their geometric product is equal to their inner product, whereas formula_23 and formula_44 are perpendicular if their geometric product is equal to their exterior product. In a geometric algebra for which the square of any nonzero vector is positive, the inner product of two vectors can be identified with the dot product of standard vector algebra. The exterior product of two vectors can be identified with the signed area enclosed by a parallelogram the sides of which are the vectors. The cross product of two vectors in formula_57 dimensions with positive-definite quadratic form is closely related to their exterior product.
Most instances of geometric algebras of interest have a nondegenerate quadratic form. If the quadratic form is fully degenerate, the inner product of any two vectors is always zero, and the geometric algebra is then simply an exterior algebra. Unless otherwise stated, this article will treat only nondegenerate geometric algebras.
The exterior product is naturally extended as an associative bilinear binary operator between any two elements of the algebra, satisfying the identities
where the sum is over all permutations of the indices, with formula_59 the sign of the permutation, and formula_60 are vectors (not general elements of the algebra). Since every element of the algebra can be expressed as the sum of products of this form, this defines the exterior product for every pair of elements of the algebra. It follows from the definition that the exterior product forms an alternating algebra.
Blades, grades, and canonical basis.
A multivector that is the exterior product of formula_61 linearly independent vectors is called a "blade", and is said to be of grade formula_61. A multivector that is the sum of blades of grade formula_61 is called a (homogeneous) multivector of grade formula_61. From the axioms, with closure, every multivector of the geometric algebra is a sum of blades.
Consider a set of formula_61 linearly independent vectors formula_66 spanning an formula_61-dimensional subspace of the vector space. With these, we can define a real symmetric matrix (in the same way as a Gramian matrix)
By the spectral theorem, formula_69 can be diagonalized to diagonal matrix formula_70 by an orthogonal matrix formula_71 via
Define a new set of vectors formula_73, known as orthogonal basis vectors, to be those transformed by the orthogonal matrix:
Since orthogonal transformations preserve inner products, it follows that formula_75 and thus the formula_73 are perpendicular. In other words, the geometric product of two distinct vectors formula_77 is completely specified by their exterior product, or more generally
Therefore, every blade of grade formula_61 can be written as a geometric product of formula_61 vectors. More generally, if a degenerate geometric algebra is allowed, then the orthogonal matrix is replaced by a block matrix that is orthogonal in the nondegenerate block, and the diagonal matrix has zero-valued entries along the degenerate dimensions. If the new vectors of the nondegenerate subspace are normalized according to
then these normalized vectors must square to formula_82 or formula_83. By Sylvester's law of inertia, the total number of formula_82s and the total number of formula_83s along the diagonal matrix is invariant. By extension, the total number formula_86 of these vectors that square to formula_82 and the total number formula_88 that square to formula_83 is invariant. (The total number of basis vectors that square to zero is also invariant, and may be nonzero if the degenerate case is allowed.) We denote this algebra formula_90. For example, formula_91 models formula_57-dimensional Euclidean space, formula_93 relativistic spacetime and formula_94 a conformal geometric algebra of a formula_57-dimensional space.
The set of all possible products of formula_96 orthogonal basis vectors with indices in increasing order, including formula_18 as the empty product, forms a basis for the entire geometric algebra (an analogue of the PBW theorem). For example, the following is a basis for the geometric algebra formula_98:
A basis formed this way is called a canonical basis for the geometric algebra, and any other orthogonal basis for formula_2 will produce another canonical basis. Each canonical basis consists of formula_101 elements. Every multivector of the geometric algebra can be expressed as a linear combination of the canonical basis elements. If the canonical basis elements are formula_102 with formula_103 being an index set, then the geometric product of any two multivectors is
The terminology "formula_105-vector" is often encountered to describe multivectors containing elements of only one grade. In higher dimensional space, some such multivectors are not blades (cannot be factored into the exterior product of formula_105 vectors). By way of example, formula_107 in formula_108 cannot be factored; typically, however, such elements of the algebra do not yield to geometric interpretation as objects, although they may represent geometric quantities such as rotations. Only formula_109 and formula_96-vectors are always blades in formula_96-space.
Grade projection.
Using an orthogonal basis, a graded vector space structure can be established. Elements of the geometric algebra that are scalar multiples of formula_18 are grade-formula_113 blades and are called "scalars". Multivectors that are in the span of formula_114 are grade-formula_18 blades and are the ordinary vectors. Multivectors in the span of formula_116 are grade-formula_117 blades and are the bivectors. This terminology continues through to the last grade of formula_96-vectors. Alternatively, grade-formula_96 blades are called pseudoscalars, grade-formula_120 blades pseudovectors, etc. Many of the elements of the algebra are not graded by this scheme since they are sums of elements of differing grade. Such elements are said to be of "mixed grade". The grading of multivectors is independent of the basis chosen originally.
This is a grading as a vector space, but not as an algebra. Because the product of an formula_61-blade and an formula_122-blade is contained in the span of formula_113 through formula_124-blades, the geometric algebra is a filtered algebra.
A multivector formula_125 may be decomposed with the grade-projection operator formula_126, which outputs the grade-formula_61 portion of formula_125. As a result:
As an example, the geometric product of two vectors formula_130 since formula_131 and formula_132 and formula_133, for formula_134 other than formula_113 and formula_117.
The decomposition of a multivector formula_125 may also be split into those components that are even and those that are odd:
This is the result of forgetting structure from a formula_140-graded vector space to formula_141-graded vector space. The geometric product respects this coarser grading. Thus in addition to being a formula_141-graded vector space, the geometric algebra is a formula_141-graded algebra or superalgebra.
Restricting to the even part, the product of two even elements is also even. This means that the even multivectors defines an "even subalgebra". The even subalgebra of an formula_96-dimensional geometric algebra is isomorphic (without preserving either filtration or grading) to a full geometric algebra of formula_120 dimensions. Examples include formula_146 and formula_147.
Representation of subspaces.
Geometric algebra represents subspaces of formula_2 as blades, and so they coexist in the same algebra with vectors from formula_2. A formula_105-dimensional subspace formula_151 of formula_2 is represented by taking an orthogonal basis formula_153 and using the geometric product to form the blade formula_154. There are multiple blades representing formula_151; all those representing formula_151 are scalar multiples of formula_157. These blades can be separated into two sets: positive multiples of formula_157 and negative multiples of formula_157. The positive multiples of formula_157 are said to have "the same orientation" as formula_157, and the negative multiples the "opposite orientation".
Blades are important since geometric operations such as projections, rotations and reflections depend on the factorability via the exterior product that (the restricted class of) formula_96-blades provide but that (the generalized class of) grade-formula_96 multivectors do not when formula_164.
Unit pseudoscalars.
Unit pseudoscalars are blades that play important roles in GA. A unit pseudoscalar for a non-degenerate subspace formula_151 of formula_2 is a blade that is the product of the members of an orthonormal basis for formula_151. It can be shown that if formula_168 and formula_169 are both unit pseudoscalars for formula_151, then formula_171 and formula_172. If one doesn't choose an orthonormal basis for formula_151, then the Plucker embedding gives a vector in the exterior algebra but only up to scaling. Using the vector space isomorphism between the geometric algebra and exterior algebra, this gives the equivalence class of formula_174 for all formula_175. Orthonormality gets rid of this ambiguity except for the signs above.
Suppose the geometric algebra formula_176 with the familiar positive definite inner product on formula_177 is formed. Given a plane (formula_117-dimensional subspace) of formula_177, one can find an orthonormal basis formula_180 spanning the plane, and thus find a unit pseudoscalar formula_181 representing this plane. The geometric product of any two vectors in the span of formula_182 and formula_183 lies in formula_184, that is, it is the sum of a formula_113-vector and a formula_117-vector.
By the properties of the geometric product, formula_187. The resemblance to the imaginary unit is not incidental: the subspace formula_188 is formula_37-algebra isomorphic to the complex numbers. In this way, a copy of the complex numbers is embedded in the geometric algebra for each 2-dimensional subspace of formula_2 on which the quadratic form is definite.
It is sometimes possible to identify the presence of an imaginary unit in a physical equation. Such units arise from one of the many quantities in the real algebra that square to formula_83, and these have geometric significance because of the properties of the algebra and the interaction of its various subspaces.
In formula_98, a further familiar case occurs. Given a canonical basis consisting of orthonormal vectors formula_193 of formula_2, the set of "all" formula_117-vectors is spanned by
Labelling these formula_134, formula_198 and formula_105 (momentarily deviating from our uppercase convention), the subspace generated by formula_113-vectors and formula_117-vectors is exactly formula_202. This set is seen to be the even subalgebra of formula_98, and furthermore is isomorphic as an formula_37-algebra to the quaternions, another important algebraic system.
Dual basis.
Let formula_205 be a basis of formula_2, i.e. a set of formula_96 linearly independent vectors that span the formula_96-dimensional vector space formula_2. The basis that is dual to formula_205 is the set of elements of the dual vector space formula_211 that forms a biorthogonal system with this basis, thus being the elements denoted formula_212 satisfying
where formula_214 is the Kronecker delta.
Given a nondegenerate quadratic form on formula_2, formula_211 becomes naturally identified with formula_2, and the dual basis may be regarded as elements of formula_2, but are not in general the same set as the original basis.
Given further a GA of formula_2, let 
be the pseudoscalar (which does not necessarily square to formula_221) formed from the basis formula_205. The dual basis vectors may be constructed as
where the formula_224 denotes that the formula_134th basis vector is omitted from the product.
Extensions of the inner and exterior products.
It is common practice to extend the exterior product on vectors to the entire algebra. This may be done through the use of the grade projection operator:
This generalization is consistent with the above definition involving antisymmetrization. Another generalization related to the exterior product is the commutator product:
The regressive product (usually referred to as the "meet") is the dual of the exterior product (or "join" in this context). The dual specification of elements permits, for blades formula_125 and formula_229, the intersection (or meet) where the duality is to be taken relative to the smallest grade blade containing both formula_125 and formula_229 (the join).
with formula_168 the unit pseudoscalar of the algebra. The regressive product, like the exterior product, is associative.
The inner product on vectors can also be generalized, but in more than one non-equivalent way. The paper gives a full treatment of several different inner products developed for geometric algebras and their interrelationships, and the notation is taken from there. Many authors use the same symbol as for the inner product of vectors for their chosen extension (e.g. Hestenes and Perwass). No consistent notation has emerged.
Among these several different generalizations of the inner product on vectors are:
 makes an argument for the use of contractions in preference to Hestenes's inner product; they are algebraically more regular and have cleaner geometric interpretations. 
A number of identities incorporating the contractions are valid without restriction of their inputs.
For example,
Benefits of using the left contraction as an extension of the inner product on vectors include that the identity formula_244 is extended to formula_245 for any vector formula_23 and multivector formula_229, and that the projection operation formula_248 is extended to formula_249 for any blade formula_229 and any multivector formula_125 (with a minor modification to accommodate null formula_229, given below).
Linear functions.
Although a versor is easier to work with because it can be directly represented in the algebra as a multivector, versors are a subgroup of linear functions on multivectors, which can still be used when necessary. The geometric algebra of an formula_96-dimensional vector space is spanned by a basis of formula_101 elements. If a multivector is represented by a formula_255 real column matrix of coefficients of a basis of the algebra, then all linear transformations of the multivector can be expressed as the matrix multiplication by a formula_256 real matrix. However, such a general linear transformation allows arbitrary exchanges among grades, such as a "rotation" of a scalar into a vector, which has no evident geometric interpretation.
A general linear transformation from vectors to vectors is of interest. With the natural restriction to preserving the induced exterior algebra, the "outermorphism" of the linear transformation is the unique(1) = 1&lt;/math&gt; is usually added to ensure that the zero map is unique.}} extension of the versor. If formula_257 is a linear function that maps vectors to vectors, then its outermorphism is the function that obeys the rule
for a blade, extended to the whole algebra through linearity.
Modeling geometries.
Although a lot of attention has been placed on CGA, it is to be noted that GA is not just one algebra, it is one of a family of algebras with the same essential structure.
Vector space model.
formula_91 may be considered as an extension or completion of vector algebra. "From Vectors to Geometric Algebra" covers basic analytic geometry and gives an introduction to stereographic projection.
The even subalgebra of formula_260 is isomorphic to the complex numbers, as may be seen by writing a vector formula_261 in terms of its components in an orthonormal basis and left multiplying by the basis vector formula_262, yielding
where we identify formula_264 since
Similarly, the even subalgebra of formula_91 with basis formula_267 is isomorphic to the quaternions as may be seen by identifying formula_268, formula_269 and formula_270.
Every associative algebra has a matrix representation; replacing the three Cartesian basis vectors by the Pauli matrices gives a representation of formula_91:
Dotting the "Pauli vector" (a dyad):
Spacetime model.
In physics, the main applications are the geometric algebra of Minkowski 3+1 spacetime, , called spacetime algebra (STA), or less commonly, , interpreted the algebra of physical space (APS).
While in STA points of spacetime are represented simply by vectors, in APS, points of formula_280-dimensional spacetime are instead represented by paravectors: a formula_57-dimensional vector (space) plus a formula_18-dimensional scalar (time).
In spacetime algebra the electromagnetic field tensor has a bivector representation formula_283. Here, the formula_284 is the unit pseudoscalar (or four-dimensional volume element), formula_285 is the unit vector in time direction, and formula_286 and formula_229 are the classic electric and magnetic field vectors (with a zero time component). Using the four-current formula_288, Maxwell's equations then become
In geometric calculus, juxtapositioning of vectors such as in formula_289 indicate the geometric product and can be decomposed into parts as formula_290. Here formula_157 is the covector derivative in any spacetime and reduces to formula_292 in flat spacetime. Where formula_293 plays a role in Minkowski formula_294-spacetime which is synonymous to the role of formula_292 in Euclidean formula_57-space and is related to the d'Alembertian by formula_297. Indeed, given an observer represented by a future pointing timelike vector formula_285 we have
Boosts in this Lorentzian metric space have the same expression formula_301 as rotation in Euclidean space, where formula_302 is the bivector generated by the time and the space directions involved, whereas in the Euclidean case it is the bivector generated by the two space directions, strengthening the "analogy" to almost identity.
The Dirac matrices are a representation of formula_93, showing the equivalence with matrix representations used by physicists.
Homogeneous model.
The first model here is formula_304, the GA version of homogeneous coordinates used in projective geometry. Here a vector represents a point and an outer product of vectors an oriented length yet we may work with the algebra in just the same way as in formula_91. However, a useful inner product cannot be defined in the space and so there is no geometric product either leaving only outer product and non-metric uses of duality such as meet and join.
Nevertheless, there has been investigation of 4-dimensional alternatives to the full 5-dimensional CGA for limited geometries such as rigid body movements. A selection of these can be found in Part IV of "Guide to Geometric Algebra in Practice". Note that the algebra formula_306 appears as a subalgebra of CGA by selecting just one null basis vector and dropping the other and further that the "motor algebra" (isomorphic to dual quaternions) is the even subalgebra of formula_306.
Conformal model.
A compact description of the current state of the art is provided by , which also includes further references, in particular to . Other useful references are and .
Working within GA, Euclidean space formula_308 (along with a conformal point at infinity) is embedded projectively in the CGA formula_309 via the identification of Euclidean points with formula_18-d subspaces in the formula_294-d null cone of the formula_312-d CGA vector subspace. This allows all conformal transformations to be done as rotations and reflections and is covariant, extending incidence relations of projective geometry to circles and spheres.
Specifically, we add orthogonal basis vectors formula_313 and formula_314 such that formula_315 and formula_316 to the basis of the vector space that generates formula_317 and identify null vectors
This procedure has some similarities to the procedure for working with homogeneous coordinates in projective geometry and in this case allows the modeling of Euclidean transformations of formula_321 as orthogonal transformations of a subset of formula_322.
A fast changing and fluid area of GA, CGA is also being investigated for applications to relativistic physics.
Models for projective transformation.
Two potential candidates are currently under investigation as the foundation for affine and projective geometry in 3-dimensions formula_323and formula_324 which includes representations for shears and non-uniform scaling, as well as quadric surfaces and conic sections.
A new research model, Quadric Conformal Geometric Algebra (QCGA) formula_325 is an extension of CGA, dedicated to quadric surfaces. The idea is to represent the objects in low dimensional subspaces of the algebra. QCGA is capable of constructing quadric surfaces either using control points or implicit equations. Moreover, QCGA can compute the intersection of quadric surfaces, as well as, the surface tangent and normal vectors at a point that lies in the quadric surface.
Geometric interpretation.
Projection and rejection.
For any vector formula_23 and any invertible vector formula_327,
where the projection of formula_23 onto formula_327 (or the parallel part) is
and the rejection of formula_23 from formula_327 (or the orthogonal part) is
Using the concept of a formula_105-blade formula_229 as representing a subspace of formula_2 and every multivector ultimately being expressed in terms of vectors, this generalizes to projection of a general multivector onto any invertible formula_105-blade formula_229 as
with the rejection being defined as
The projection and rejection generalize to null blades formula_229 by replacing the inverse formula_343 with the pseudoinverse formula_344 with respect to the contractive product. The outcome of the projection coincides in both cases for non-null blades. For null blades formula_229, the definition of the projection given here with the first contraction rather than the second being onto the pseudoinverse should be used, as only then is the result necessarily in the subspace represented by formula_229.
The projection generalizes through linearity to general multivectors formula_125. The projection is not linear in formula_229 and does not generalize to objects formula_229 that are not blades.
Reflection.
Simple reflections in a hyperplane are readily expressed in the algebra through conjugation with a single vector. These serve to generate the group of general rotoreflections and rotations.
The reflection formula_350 of a vector formula_351 along a vector formula_327, or equivalently in the hyperplane orthogonal to formula_327, is the same as negating the component of a vector parallel to formula_327. The result of the reflection will be 
This is not the most general operation that may be regarded as a reflection when the dimension formula_164. A general reflection may be expressed as the composite of any odd number of single-axis reflections. Thus, a general reflection formula_357 of a vector formula_23 may be written
where
If we define the reflection along a non-null vector formula_327 of the product of vectors as the reflection of every vector in the product along the same vector, we get for any product of an odd number of vectors that, by way of example,
and for the product of an even number of vectors that
Using the concept of every multivector ultimately being expressed in terms of vectors, the reflection of a general multivector formula_125 using any reflection versor formula_366 may be written
where formula_368 is the automorphism of reflection through the origin of the vector space (formula_369) extended through linearity to the whole algebra.
Rotations.
If we have a product of vectors formula_370 then we denote the reverse as
As an example, assume that formula_372 we get
Scaling formula_374 so that formula_375 then
so formula_377 leaves the length of formula_378 unchanged. We can also show that
so the transformation formula_377 preserves both length and angle. It therefore can be identified as a rotation or rotoreflection; formula_374 is called a rotor if it is a proper rotation (as it is if it can be expressed as a product of an even number of vectors) and is an instance of what is known in GA as a "versor".
There is a general method for rotating a vector involving the formation of a multivector of the form formula_382 that produces a rotation formula_383 in the plane and with the orientation defined by a formula_117-blade formula_385.
Rotors are a generalization of quaternions to formula_96-dimensional spaces.
Versor.
A formula_105-versor is a multivector that can be expressed as the geometric product of formula_105 invertible vectors. Unit quaternions (originally called versors by Hamilton) may be identified with rotors in 3D space in much the same way as real 2D rotors subsume complex numbers; for the details refer to Dorst.
Some authors use the term “versor product” to refer to the frequently occurring case where an operand is "sandwiched" between operators. The descriptions for rotations and reflections, including their outermorphisms, are examples of such sandwiching. These outermorphisms have a particularly simple algebraic form. Specifically, a mapping of vectors of the form
Since both operators and operand are versors there is potential for alternative examples such as rotating a rotor or reflecting a spinor always provided that some geometrical or physical significance can be attached to such operations.
By the Cartan–Dieudonné theorem we have that every isometry can be given as reflections in hyperplanes and since composed reflections provide rotations then we have that orthogonal transformations are versors.
In group terms, for a real, non-degenerate formula_9, having identified the group formula_392 as the group of all invertible elements of formula_393, Lundholm gives a proof that the "versor group" formula_394 (the set of invertible versors) is equal to the Lipschitz group formula_395 ( Clifford group, although Lundholm deprecates this usage).
Subgroups of.
Lundholm defines the formula_396, formula_397, and formula_398 subgroups, generated by unit vectors, and in the case of formula_397 and formula_398, only an even number of such vector factors can be present.
Spinors are defined as elements of the even subalgebra of a real GA; an analysis of the GA approach to spinors is given by Francis and Kosowsky.
Examples and applications.
Hypervolume of a parallelotope spanned by vectors.
For vectors formula_274 and formula_275 spanning a parallelogram we have
with the result that formula_404 is linear in the product of the "altitude" and the "base" of the parallelogram, that is, its area.
Similar interpretations are true for any number of vectors spanning an formula_96-dimensional parallelotope; the exterior product of vectors formula_406, that is formula_407, has a magnitude equal to the volume of the formula_96-parallelotope. An formula_96-vector does not necessarily have a shape of a parallelotope – this is a convenient visualization. It could be any shape, although the volume equals that of the parallelotope.
Intersection of a line and a plane.
We may define the line parametrically by formula_410 where formula_86 and formula_412 are position vectors for points P and T and formula_378 is the direction vector for the line.
Then
so
and
Rotating systems.
The mathematical description of rotational forces such as torque and angular momentum often makes use of the cross product of vector calculus in three dimensions with a convention of orientation (handedness).
The cross product can be viewed in terms of the exterior product allowing a more natural geometric interpretation of the cross product as a bivector using the dual relationship
For example, torque is generally defined as the magnitude of the perpendicular force component times distance, or work per unit angle.
Suppose a circular path in an arbitrary plane containing orthonormal vectors formula_419 and formula_420 is parameterized by angle.
By designating the unit bivector of this plane as the imaginary number
this path vector can be conveniently written in complex exponential form
and the derivative with respect to angle is
So the torque, the rate of change of work formula_151, due to a force formula_1, is
Unlike the cross product description of torque, formula_429, the geometric algebra description does not introduce a vector in the normal direction; a vector that does not exist in two and that is not unique in greater than three dimensions. The unit bivector describes the plane and the orientation of the rotation, and the sense of the rotation is relative to the angle between the vectors formula_430 and formula_431.
Geometric calculus.
Geometric calculus extends the formalism to include differentiation and integration including differential geometry and differential forms.
Essentially, the vector derivative is defined so that the GA version of Green's theorem is true,
and then one can write
as a geometric product, effectively generalizing Stokes' theorem (including the differential form version of it).
In formula_434 when formula_125 is a curve with endpoints formula_23 and formula_44, then
reduces to
or the fundamental theorem of integral calculus.
Also developed are the concept of vector manifold and geometric integration theory (which generalizes differential forms).
History.
Although the connection of geometry with algebra dates as far back at least to Euclid's "Elements" in the third century B.C. (see Greek geometric algebra), GA in the sense used in this article was not developed until 1844, when it was used in a "systematic way" to describe the geometrical properties and "transformations" of a space. In that year, Hermann Grassmann introduced the idea of a geometrical algebra in full generality as a certain calculus (analogous to the propositional calculus) that encoded all of the geometrical information of a space. Grassmann's algebraic system could be applied to a number of different kinds of spaces, the chief among them being Euclidean space, affine space, and projective space. Following Grassmann, in 1878 William Kingdon Clifford examined Grassmann's algebraic system alongside the quaternions of William Rowan Hamilton in . From his point of view, the quaternions described certain "transformations" (which he called "rotors"), whereas Grassmann's algebra described certain "properties" (or "Strecken" such as length, area, and volume). His contribution was to define a new product — the "geometric product" – on an existing Grassmann algebra, which realized the quaternions as living within that algebra. Subsequently, Rudolf Lipschitz in 1886 generalized Clifford's interpretation of the quaternions and applied them to the geometry of rotations in formula_96 dimensions. Later these developments would lead other 20th-century mathematicians to formalize and explore the properties of the Clifford algebra.
Nevertheless, another revolutionary development of the 19th-century would completely overshadow the geometric algebras: that of vector analysis, developed independently by Josiah Willard Gibbs and Oliver Heaviside. Vector analysis was motivated by James Clerk Maxwell's studies of electromagnetism, and specifically the need to express and manipulate conveniently certain differential equations. Vector analysis had a certain intuitive appeal compared to the rigors of the new algebras. Physicists and mathematicians alike readily adopted it as their geometrical toolkit of choice, particularly following the influential 1901 textbook "Vector Analysis" by Edwin Bidwell Wilson, following lectures of Gibbs.
In more detail, there have been three approaches to geometric algebra: quaternionic analysis, initiated by Hamilton in 1843 and geometrized as rotors by Clifford in 1878; geometric algebra, initiated by Grassmann in 1844; and vector analysis, developed out of quaternionic analysis in the late 19th century by Gibbs and Heaviside. The legacy of quaternionic analysis in vector analysis can be seen in the use of formula_134, formula_198, formula_105 to indicate the basis vectors of formula_321: it is being thought of as the purely imaginary quaternions. From the perspective of geometric algebra, the even subalgebra of the Space Time Algebra is isomorphic to the GA of 3D Euclidean space and quaternions are isomorphic to the even subalgebra of the GA of 3D Euclidean space, which unifies the three approaches.
Progress on the study of Clifford algebras quietly advanced through the twentieth century, although largely due to the work of abstract algebraists such as Hermann Weyl and Claude Chevalley. The "geometrical" approach to geometric algebras has seen a number of 20th-century revivals. In mathematics, Emil Artin's "Geometric Algebra" discusses the algebra associated with each of a number of geometries, including affine geometry, projective geometry, symplectic geometry, and orthogonal geometry. In physics, geometric algebras have been revived as a "new" way to do classical mechanics and electromagnetism, together with more advanced topics such as quantum mechanics and gauge theory. David Hestenes reinterpreted the Pauli and Dirac matrices as vectors in ordinary space and spacetime, respectively, and has been a primary contemporary advocate for the use of geometric algebra.
In computer graphics and robotics, geometric algebras have been revived in order to efficiently represent rotations and other transformations. For applications of GA in robotics (screw theory, kinematics and dynamics using versors), computer vision, control and neural computing (geometric learning) see Bayro (2010).
Conferences and Journals.
The main conferences in this subject include the International Conference on Clifford Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical Physics (ICCA) and Applications of Geometric Algebra in Computer Science and Engineering (AGACSE) series. A main publication outlet is the Springer journal Advances in Applied Clifford Algebras.
Software.
GA is a very application-oriented subject. There is a reasonably steep initial learning curve associated with it, but this can be eased somewhat by the use of applicable software. The following is a list of freely available software that does not require ownership of commercial software or purchase of any commercial products for this purpose:
Other projects.
Software allowing script creation and including sample visualizations, manual and GA introduction.
For programmers, this is a code generator with support for C, C++, C# and Java.
External links.
English translations of early books and papers
Research groups

