
In Norse mythology, Geri and Freki (Old Norse, both meaning "the ravenous" or "greedy one") are two wolves which are said to accompany the god Odin. They are attested in the "Poetic Edda", a collection of epic poetry compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, in the "Prose Edda", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, and in the poetry of skalds. The pair has been compared to similar figures found in Greek, Roman and Vedic mythology, and may also be connected to beliefs surrounding the Germanic "wolf-warrior bands", the Úlfhéðnar.
Etymology.
The names "Geri" and "Freki" have been interpreted as meaning either "the greedy one" or "the ravenous one". The name "Geri" can be traced back to the Proto-Germanic adjective , attested in Burgundian "girs", Old Norse and Old High German or , all of which mean "greedy".
The name "Freki" can be traced back to the Proto-Germanic adjective , attested in Gothic () "covetous, avaricious", Old Norse "greedy", Old English "desirous, greedy, gluttonous, audacious" and Old High German "greedy". John Lindow interprets both Old Norse names as nominalized adjectives. Bruce Lincoln further traces "Geri" back to a Proto-Indo-European stem *"", which is the same as that found in , a name referring to the hound closely associated with the events of .
Attestations.
In the "Poetic Edda" poem "Grímnismál", the god Odin (disguised as "Grímnir") provides the young Agnarr with information about Odin's companions. Agnarr is told that Odin feeds Geri and Freki while the god himself consumes only wine:
The pair is also alluded to via the kenning "Viðrir's (Odin's) hounds" in "Helgakviða Hundingsbana I", verse 13, where it is related that they roam the field "greedy for the corpses of those who have fallen in battle".
In the "Prose Edda" book "Gylfaginning" (chapter 38), the enthroned figure of High explains that Odin gives all of the food on his table to his wolves Geri and Freki and that Odin requires no food, for wine is to him both meat and drink. High then quotes the above-mentioned stanza from the poem "Grímnismál" in support. In chapter 75 of the "Prose Edda" book "Skáldskaparmál" a list of names for wargs and wolves is provided that includes both Geri and Freki.
In skaldic poetry "Geri" and "Freki" are used as common nouns for "wolf" in chapter 58 of "Skáldskaparmál" (quoted in works by the skalds Þjóðólfr of Hvinir and Egill Skallagrímsson) and "Geri" is again used as a common noun for "wolf" in chapter 64 of the "Prose Edda" book "Háttatal". Geri is referenced in kennings for "blood" in chapter 58 of "Skáldskaparmál" ("Geri's ales" in a work by the skald Þórðr Sjáreksson) and in for "carrion" in chapter 60 ("Geri's morsel" in a work by the skald Einarr Skúlason). "Freki" is also used in a kenning for "carrion" ("Freki's meal") in a work by Þórðr Sjáreksson in chapter 58 of "Skáldskaparmál".
Archaeological record.
If the rider on horseback on the image on the Böksta Runestone has been correctly identified as Odin, then Geri and Freki are shown taking part in hunting an elk.
Theories.
"Freki" is also a name applied to the monstrous wolf Fenrir in the "Poetic Edda" poem "Völuspá". Folklorist John Lindow sees irony in the fact that Odin feeds one Freki at his dinner table and another—Fenrir—with his flesh during the events of Ragnarök.
Historian Michael Spiedel connects Geri and Freki with archaeological finds depicting figures wearing wolf-pelts and frequently found wolf-related names among the Germanic peoples, including Wulfhroc ("Wolf-Frock"), Wolfhetan ("Wolf-Hide"), Isangrim ("Grey-Mask"), Scrutolf ("Garb-Wolf"), Wolfram ("Wolf (and) Raven"), Wolfgang ("Wolf-Gait"), Wolfdregil ("Wolf-Runner"), and Vulfolaic ("Wolf-Dancer") and myths regarding wolf warriors from Norse mythology (such as the Úlfhéðnar). Michael Speidel believes this to point to the pan-Germanic wolf-warrior band cult centered on Odin that waned away after Christianization.
Scholars have also noted Indo-European parallels to the wolves Geri and Freki as companions of a divinity. 19th century scholar Jacob Grimm observed a connection between this aspect of Odin's character and the Greek Apollo, to whom both the wolf and the raven are sacred. Philologist Maurice Bloomfield further connected the pair with the two dogs of Yama in Vedic mythology, and saw them as a Germanic counterpart to a more general and widespread Indo-European "Cerberus"-theme. Speidel finds similar parallels in the Vedic Rudra and the Roman Mars. Elaborating on the connection between wolves and figures of great power, he writes: "This is why Geri and Freki, the wolves at Woden's side, also glowered on the throne of the Anglo-Saxon kings. Wolf-warriors, like Geri and Freki, were not mere animals but mythical beings: as Woden's followers they bodied forth his might, and so did wolf-warriors."
Bernd Heinrich theorizes that Geri and Freki, along with Odin and his ravens Huginn and Muninn, reflect a symbiosis observed in the natural world among ravens, wolves, and humans on the hunt:

