
"Golden Brown" is a song by the English rock band the Stranglers released as a 7" single on EMI's Liberty label in 1982. It was the second single released from the band's sixth album "La folie" and peaked at No. 2 in the UK Singles Chart, the band's highest ever placing in that chart. It has also been recorded by many other artists.
Composition.
The main body of the song is in 6/8 time and is pitched halfway between the keys of E minor and E-flat minor. The instrumental introduction, in (a very flat) B minor, alternates bars in 6/8 and 7/8. The music was largely written by keyboardist Dave Greenfield and drummer Jet Black, with lyrics by singer/guitarist Hugh Cornwell.
The BBC newsreader Bill Turnbull attempted to waltz to the song in the 2005 series of "Strictly Come Dancing". In February 2012, when interviewing Stranglers bassist Jean-Jacques Burnel on "BBC Breakfast", Turnbull described the attempted dance as "a disaster", Burnel responded that the alternating time signatures made "Golden Brown" impossible to dance to; in contrast, a song written entirely in 6/8 is not unusual in waltzing.
Lyrics.
There has been much controversy surrounding the lyrics. In his book "The Stranglers Song By Song" (2001), Hugh Cornwell states, "'Golden Brown' works on two levels. It's about heroin and also about a girl." Essentially the lyrics describe how "both provided me with pleasurable times."
Release and reception.
Originally featured on the group's album "La folie", which was released in November 1981, and later on the USA pressings of "Feline", "Golden Brown" was released as a single in January 1982, and was accompanied by a video. It reached No. 2 in the official UK Singles Chart in February 1982, remaining there for two weeks behind double A-sided record "Town Called Malice/Precious" by the Jam.
The single was a top 10 hit around the world, including Australia. It was also featured in the film "Snatch" and is included on its soundtrack album. David Hamilton, disc jockey on the comparatively conservative BBC Radio 2, which was a middle-of-the-road music radio station at that time, made the single his "record of the week".
In January 2014, "NME" ranked the song at No. 488 on its list of "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time".
"Number Two" poll.
In a BBC Radio 2 listener poll of the nation's favourite singles to have peaked at number two, conducted in late 2012, "Golden Brown" ranked fifth behind "Vienna", "Fairytale of New York", "Sit Down" and "American Pie", and just ahead of "Waterloo Sunset" and "Penny Lane"/"Strawberry Fields Forever".
Music video.
The video for "Golden Brown" was directed by Lindsey Clennell. It depicts the band members both as explorers in an Arabian country and non-Arab Muslim countries (sequences include images of the Pyramids as well as the explorers studying a map of Egypt) in the 1920s and performers for a fictional "Radio Cairo".
In addition to the Pyramids, the video is intercut with stock footage of the Mir-i-Arab Madrasah in Bukhara, the Shah Mosque in Isfahan, the Great Sphinx, Feluccas sailing, Bedouins riding, and camel racing in the United Arab Emirates. The performance scenes were filmed in the Leighton House Museum in Holland Park, London, which was also used in the filming of the video for "Gold" by Spandau Ballet.
Track listing.
Songs, lyrics and music by the Stranglers.
7": Liberty / BP 407 (UK).
Side one
Side two
1991 7": Epic / 656761 7 (UK).
Side one
Side two
Charts.
Remix
Cover versions.
In 1996 British hip hop group Kaleef's re-working of the song reached number 22 in the UK Charts. The following year, a cover version by soul singer Omar reached number 37. 
In 2020, British YouTuber and saxophonist Laurence Mason's cover of "Golden Brown" in the style of classical American jazz pianist Dave Brubeck was viewed over a million times leading to a commercial release via Amazon and iTunes, and as a vinyl single under the title "Take Vibe EP" (in reference to the song "Take Five" by the Dave Brubeck Quartet). The vinyl release stayed two weeks in the Official Vinyl Singles Chart's Top 40, peaking at No 24.

