
Hee Haw is an American television variety show featuring country music and humor with the fictional rural "Kornfield Kounty" as the backdrop. It aired first-run on CBS from 1969 to 1971, in syndication from 1971 to 1993, and on TNN from 1996 to 1997. Reruns of the series ran on RFD-TV (from September 2008 through April 2020) and currently on Circle (beginning January 2020).
The show was inspired by "Rowan &amp; Martin's Laugh-In", with the major differences being that "Hee Haw" was centered on country music and rural rather than pop culture, and was far less topical. Hosted by country music artists Buck Owens and Roy Clark for most of its run, the show was equally well known for its corn pone humor as for its voluptuous, scantily clad women (called the Hee Haw Honeys) in stereotypical farmer's daughter outfits.
"Hee Haw"'s appeal, however, was not limited to a rural audience. It was successful in all of the major markets, including network-based Los Angeles and New York City, as well as other large cities like Boston and Chicago. Other niche programs such as "The Lawrence Welk Show" (which targeted older audiences) and "Soul Train" (which targeted black audiences) also rose to prominence in syndication during the era. Like "Laugh-In", the show minimized production costs by taping all of the recurring sketches for a season in batches, setting up for the Cornfield one day, the Joke Fence on another day, etc. At the height of its popularity, an entire season's worth of shows were taped in two separate week-long sessions, then individual shows were assembled from edited sections. Only musical performances were taped with a live audience, while a laugh track was added to all other segments.
The series was taped for the CBS Television Network at its station affiliate WLAC-TV (now WTVF) in downtown Nashville, Tennessee, and later at Opryland USA in the city's Donelson area. The show was produced by Yongestreet Productions through the mid-1980s; it was later produced by Gaylord Entertainment, which distributed the show in syndication. The show's name, derived from a common English onomatopoeia used to describe a donkey's braying, was coined by show business talent manager and producer Bernie Brillstein.
After 25 seasons, the series initially ended its run in June 1993, where it was soon picked up by TNN for reruns. TNN eventually ordered an additional season of first-run episodes, beginning November 23, 1996. The show ultimately ended on December 27, 1997.
History.
Creation.
"Hee Haw's" creators, Frank Peppiatt and John Aylesworth, were both Canadian-born writers who had extensive experience in writing for variety shows. Inspired by the enormous prior success of rural sitcoms of the 1960s, especially on CBS, which included the small-town sympathetic "The Andy Griffith Show", followed by the country-parodying "The Beverly Hillbillies", "Petticoat Junction" and "Green Acres", Peppiatt and Aylesworth sought to create a variety show catering to the same audience--although neither one had a firm grasp on rural comedy.
The producers selected a pair of hosts who represented each side in a divide in country/western music at the time: Buck Owens was a prominent architect of the California-based Bakersfield sound and one of the biggest country hitmakers of the 1960s. Roy Clark, who had worked in Washington, D.C. and Las Vegas, was a stalwart of Nashville's Music Row known for his skill at mixing music and comedy onstage. Both Clark and Owens had been regular guests on "The Jimmy Dean Show" during Peppiatt and Aylesworth's time writing for that series. Peppiatt and Aylesworth brought on two fellow Canadian writers with more experience in rural humor, Gordie Tapp and Don Harron; Harron would appear in the recurring role of "Charlie Farquharson", the rural anchorman for station KORN. The producers also scored a country comedy expert familiar to rural audiences in Archie Campbell, who co-starred in and wrote many of the jokes and sketches, along with Tapp, George Yanok and comedian Jack Burns (who himself had briefly replaced Don Knotts on "The Andy Griffith Show") in the first season.
On CBS.
"Hee Haw" premiered on CBS in 1969 as a summer series. The network picked it up as a last-minute replacement for "The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour", a popular but controversial variety show that had been canceled amid feuds between the Smothers Brothers and the network censors over the show's topical humor. Though the show had solid ratings overall (it sat at No. 16 for the 1970-71 season), it was dropped in July 1971 by CBS as part of the so-called "Rural Purge" that abruptly cancelled all of the network's country-themed shows, including those with still-respectable ratings. The success of shows like "Hee Haw" was the source of a heated dispute in CBS's corporate offices: Vice President of network programming Michael Dann, although he personally disliked the shows, argued in favor of ratings (reflecting audience size), while his subordinate, Fred Silverman, head of daytime programming, held that certain demographics within total television viewership — in which "Hee Haw" and the others performed poorly — could draw more advertising dollars. Silverman's view won out, Dann was fired, Silverman promoted, and CBS cancelled its rural shows in the summer of 1971.
In syndication.
Undaunted, however, "Hee Haw's" producers put together a syndication deal for the show, which continued in roughly the same format for the rest of its run. Peppiatt and Aylesworth's company, Yongestreet Productions (named for Yonge Street, a prominent thoroughfare in their home city of Toronto), maintained ownership of the series.
During the show's peak in popularity, "Hee Haw" often competed in syndication against "The Lawrence Welk Show", a long-running ABC program which had likewise been cancelled in 1971, in its case in a purge of the networks' older demographic-leaning programs. Like "Hee Haw", "Lawrence Welk" was picked up for syndication in the fall of 1971, in some markets by the same stations. The success of the two shows in syndication, and the network decisions that led to their respective cancellations, were the inspiration for a novelty song, "The Lawrence Welk-Hee Haw Counter-Revolution Polka", performed by Clark; it rose to become a top 10 hit on the "Billboard" Hot Country Singles chart in the fall of 1972.
"Welk" and "Hee Haw" also competed against another music-oriented niche program that moved to syndication in 1971, "Soul Train". Originally a local program based in Chicago, the black-oriented program also went on to a very long run in syndication; unlike either program, "Soul Train" entered the market after achieving success at the local scale.
In 1981, Yongestreet was acquired by Gaylord Entertainment (best known for the "Grand Ole Opry" and its related businesses). Mirroring the long downward trend in the popularity of variety shows in general that had taken place in the 1970s, ratings began to decline for "Hee Haw" around 1986. That year, Owens departed as host, leaving Clark to continue with a celebrity guest host each week. The ratings decline continued into the early 1990s. In the fall of 1991, in an attempt to win back viewers, attract a younger audience, and keep pace with sweeping changes in the country music industry of the era, the show's format and setting underwent a dramatic overhaul. The changes included a new title ("The Hee Haw Show"), more pop-oriented country music, and the barnyard-cornfield setting replaced by a city street and shopping mall set. The first of the new episodes aired in January 1992. The changes alienated many of the show's longtime viewers while failing to gain the hoped-for younger viewers, and the ratings continued their decline.
During the summer of 1992, a decision was made to end first-run production, and instead air highlights of the show's earlier years in a revamped program called "Hee Haw Silver" (as part of celebrating the show's 25th season). Under the new format, Clark hosted a mixture of classic clips and new footage.
"Hee Haw Silver" episodes also aired a series of retrospective looks at performers who had died since performing in highlighted content, such as David "Stringbean" Akeman, Archie Campbell, Junior Samples, and Kenny Price. According to the show's producer, Sam Lovullo, the ratings showed improvement with these classic reruns; however, the series was finally cancelled in June 1993 at the conclusion of its 25th season. "Hee Haw" continued to pop up in reruns throughout the 1990s and later during the following decade in a series of successful DVD releases from Time Life.
Reruns.
After the show's syndication run ended, reruns aired on The Nashville Network from 1993 until 1995. Upon the cancellation of reruns in 1995, the program resurfaced a year later, for another first-run season, ultimately concluding the series in 1997. Its 22 years in TV syndication (1971–93) was, during its latter years, tied with "Soul Train" with the record for the longest-running U.S. syndicated TV program ("Soul Train" continued until 2006); "Hee Haw", as of 2019, ranks the sixth longest-running syndicated American TV program and the longest-running of its genre (the current record is "Entertainment Tonight", which has been on the air for years; aside from that and "Soul Train", "Wheel of Fortune", "Jeopardy!" and "Inside Edition" rank ahead of it, with "Judge Judy" surpassing "Hee Haw" in September 2019).
During the 2006–07 season CMT aired a series of reruns and TV Land also recognized the series with an award presented by k.d. lang; in attendance were Roy Clark, Gunilla Hutton, Barbi Benton, the Hager twins, Linda Thompson, Misty Rowe, and others. It was during this point, roughly between the years of 2004 and 2007, that Time Life began selling selected episodes of the show on DVD. Among the DVD content offered was the 1978 10th anniversary special that had not been seen since its original airing. CMT sporadically aired the series, usually in graveyard slots, and primarily held the rights in order to be able to air the musical performances as part of their music video library (such as during the "Pure Vintage" block on CMT Pure Country).
Reruns of "Hee Haw" began airing on RFD-TV in September 2008, where it ran for 12 years, anchoring the network's Sunday night lineup, although beginning in January 2014 an episode airs on Saturday afternoon and the same episode is rerun the following Sunday night; those episodes were cut down to comply with the 44-minute minimum. In 2011, the network began re-airing the earliest episodes from 1969–70 on Thursday evenings. That summer, many of the surviving cast members, along with a number of country artists who were guest stars on the show, taped a "Country's Family Reunion" special, entitled "Salute to the Kornfield", which aired on RFD-TV in January 2012. The special is also part of "Country's Family Reunion" 's DVD series. Concurrent with the special was the unveiling of a "Hee Haw" exhibit, titled "Pickin' and Grinnin' ", at the Oklahoma History Center in Oklahoma City. 
"Hee Haw" left RFD-TV in 2020 and began airing on the Grand Ole Opry-operated Circle network.
As part of the promotions for its DVD products, Time-Life also compiles and syndicates a half-hour clip show series "The Hee Haw Collection".
Cast members.
Two rural-style comedians, already well known in their native Canada: Gordie Tapp and Don Harron (whose KORN Radio character, newscaster Charlie Farquharson, had been a fixture of Canadian television since 1952 and later appeared on "The Red Green Show"), gained their first major U.S. exposure on Hee Haw.
Other cast members over the years included:
Roy Acuff,
Cathy Baker (as the show's emcee),
Billy Jim Baker,
Barbi Benton,
Kelly Billingsley,
Vicki Bird,
Jennifer Bishop,
Archie Campbell,
Phil Campbell,
Harry Cole (Weeping Willie),
Mackenzie Colt,
John Henry Faulk,
Tennessee Ernie Ford,
Diana Goodman,
Marianne Gordon (Rogers), 
Jim and Jon Hager,
Victoria Hallman,
Little Jimmy Henley,
Gunilla Hutton,
Linda Johnson,
Grandpa Jones,
Zella Lehr (the "unicycle girl"),
George Lindsey (reprising his "Goober" character from "The Andy Griffith Show"),
Little Jimmy Dickens,
Irlene Mandrell,
Charlie McCoy,
Dawn McKinley,
Patricia McKinnon,
Sherry Miles,
Rev. Grady Nutt,
Minnie Pearl,
Claude "Jackie" Phelps,
Slim Pickens,
Kenny Price,
Anne Randall,
Chase Randolph,
Susan Raye,
Jimmie Riddle,
Jeannine Riley,
Alice Ripley,
Lulu Roman,
Misty Rowe,
Junior Samples,
Ray Sanders,
Terry Sanders,
Gailard Sartain,
Diana Scott,
Shotgun Red,
Gerald Smith (the "Georgia Quacker"),
Jeff Smith,
Donna Stokes,
Dennis Stone,
Roni Stoneman,
Mary Taylor,
Nancy Taylor,
Linda Thompson,
Lisa Todd,
Pedro Tomas,
Nancy Traylor, 
Buck Trent,
Jackie Waddell, 
Pat Woodell, and
Jonathan Winters, among many others.
The Buckaroos (Buck Owens' band) initially served as the house band on the show and consisted of members Don Rich, Jim Shaw, Jerry Brightman, Jerry Wiggins, Rick Taylor, Doyle Singer (Doyle Curtsinger), Don Lee, Ronnie Jackson, Terry Christoffersen, Doyle Holly and, in later seasons, fiddle player Jana Jae and Victoria Hallman, who replaced Don Rich on harmony vocals (Rich was killed in a motorcycle accident in 1974). In later seasons, the show hired Nashville musicians to serve as the show's "house band." George Richey was the first music director. When he left to marry Tammy Wynette, harmonica player Charlie McCoy, already a member of the band when he was not playing on recording sessions, became the show's music director, forming the "Hee Haw Band", which became the house band for the remainder of the series' run. The Nashville Edition, a four-member (two male, two female) singing group, served as the background singers for most of the musical performances, along with performing songs on their own.
Some of the cast members made national headlines: Lulu Roman was twice charged with drug possession in 1971; David "Stringbean" Akeman and his wife were murdered in November 1973 during a robbery at their home; Slim Pickens, less than two years after joining the series, was diagnosed with a fatal brain tumor, and, as mentioned above, Don Rich of the Buckaroos was killed in a motorcycle crash in 1974.
Some cast members, such as Charlie McCoy and Tennessee Ernie Ford, originally appeared on the show as guest stars; while Barbi Benton and Sheb Wooley returned in later seasons only as a guest star.
After Buck Owens left the show, a different country music artist would accompany Roy Clark as a guest co-host each week, who would give the episode's opening performance, participate with Clark in the "Pickin' and Grinnin'" sketch, and assist Clark in introducing the other guest stars' performances. The show's final season ("Hee Haw Silver") was hosted by Clark alone.
Recurring sketches and segments.
Some of the most popular sketches and segments on "Hee Haw" included, but were not limited to:
Guest stars often participated in some of the sketches (mostly the "PFFT! You Was Gone" and "The Cornfield" sketches); however, this did not occur until later seasons.
Musical legacy.
"Hee Haw" featured a premiere showcase on commercial television throughout its run for country, bluegrass, gospel, and other styles of American traditional music, featuring hundreds of elite musical performances that were paramount to the success, popularity and legacy of the series for a broad audience of Southern, rural and purely music fans alike. Although country music was the primary genre of music featured on the show, guest stars and cast members alike also performed music from other genres, such as rock 'n' roll oldies, big band, and pop standards.
Some of the music-based segments on the show (other than guest stars' performances) included:
Lovullo also has made the claim the show presented "what were, in reality, the first musical videos." Lovullo said his videos were conceptualized by having the show's staff go to nearby rural areas and film animals and farmers, before editing the footage to fit the storyline of a particular song. "The video material was a very workable production item for the show," he wrote. "It provided picture stories for songs. However, some of our guests felt the videos took attention away from their live performances, which they hoped would promote record sales. If they had a hit song, they didn't want to play it under comic barnyard footage." The concept's mixed reaction eventually spelled an end to the "video" concept on "Hee Haw". However, several of co-host Owens' songs – including "Tall, Dark Stranger," "Big in Vegas", and "I Wouldn't Live in New York City (If They Gave Me the Whole Dang Town)" – aired on the series and have since aired on Great American Country and CMT as part of their classic country music programming blocks.
Guest stars.
"Hee Haw" featured at least two, and sometimes three or four, guest celebrities each week. While most of the guest stars were country music artists, a wide range of other famous luminaries were featured from actors and actresses to sports stars to politicians.
Sheb Wooley, one of the original cast members, wrote the show's theme song. After filming the initial 13 episodes, other professional demands caused him to leave the show, but he returned from time to time as a guest star.
Loretta Lynn was the first guest star of "Hee Haw" and made more guest appearances (24) than any other artist. She also co-hosted the show more than any other guest co-host and therefore appears on more of the DVD releases for retail sale than any other guest star. Tammy Wynette was second with 21 guest appearances, and Wynette married George Richey (the musical director for "Hee Haw" from 1970 to 1977) in 1978.
From 1990–92, country megastar Garth Brooks appeared on the show four times. In 1992, producer Sam Lovullo tried unsuccessfully to contact Brooks because he wanted him for the final show. Brooks then surprised Lovullo by showing up at the last minute, ready to don his overalls and perform for the final episode.
Stage settings.
A barn interior set was used as the main stage for most of the musical performances from the show's premiere until the debut of the "Hee Haw Honky Tonk" sketch in the early 1980s. Afterwards, the "Hee Haw Honky Tonk" set would serve as the main stage for the remainder of the series' run. Buck Owens then began using the barn interior set for his performances after it was replaced by the "Hee Haw Honky Tonk" set and was named "Buck's Place" (as a nod to one of Owens' hits, "Sam's Place"). Other settings for the musical performances throughout the series' run included a haystack (where the entire cast performed songs), the living room of a Victorian house, the front porch and lawn of the Samuel B. Sternwheeler home, a grist mill (where Roy Clark performed many of his songs in earlier seasons), and a railroad depot, where Buck Owens performed his songs before acquiring "Buck's Place."
Elvis connection.
Elvis Presley was a fan of "Hee Haw" and wanted to appear as a guest on the program, but Presley knew his manager, Colonel Tom Parker, would not allow him to do so (following Presley's death, Parker would be sued by Elvis Presley Enterprises for mismanagement). Two of the Hee Haw Honeys dated Presley long before they joined the cast: Linda Thompson in the mid-1970s, whom Presley had a long-term relationship with after his divorce from Priscilla; and Diana Goodman shortly afterwards. Charlie McCoy played harmonica on a select few of Presley's recordings in the late 1960s, and Joe Babcock of the Nashville Edition also sang backup vocals on a couple of his recordings at that time. Shortly after Presley's death, his father, Vernon Presley, made a cameo appearance on the show, alongside Thompson and Buck Owens, and paid tribute to his late son, noting how much Elvis enjoyed watching the show, and introduced one of his favorite gospel songs, as performed by the Hee Haw Gospel Quartet.
"Hee Haw Honeys" (spin-off series).
"Hee Haw" produced a short-lived spin-off series, "Hee Haw Honeys", for the 1978–79 television season. This musical sitcom starred Kathie Lee Johnson (Gifford) along with "Hee Haw" regulars Misty Rowe, Gailard Sartain, Lulu Roman, and Kenny Price as a family who owned a truck stop restaurant (likely inspired by the "Lulu's Truck Stop" sketch on "Hee Haw"). Their restaurant included a bandstand, where guest country artists would perform a couple of their hits of the day, sometimes asking the cast to join them. Cast members would also perform songs occasionally; and the Nashville Edition, "Hee Haw's" backup singing group, frequently appeared on the show, portraying regular patrons of the restaurant. Notable guest stars on "Honeys" included, but were not limited to: Loretta Lynn, The Oak Ridge Boys, Larry Gatlin, Dave &amp; Sugar, and the Kendalls. Some stations that carried "Hee Haw" would air an episode of "Honeys" prior to "Hee Haw".
Hee Haw Theater.
The Hee Haw Theater opened in Branson, Missouri, in 1981 and operated through 1983. It featured live shows using the cast of the television series, as well as guests and other talent. The format was similar with a country variety show-type family theme.
Comic book adaptations.
Charlton Comics also published humor comics based on "Hee Haw". They were drawn by Frank Roberge.
Broadcast history and Nielsen ratings.
When "Hee Haw" went into syndication, its normal time slot was on Saturday evening in the early fringe hour (7:00pm ET).
Legacy.
"Hee Haw" continues to remain popular with its long-time fans and younger viewers who have discovered the program through DVD releases or its reruns through the years on TNN, CMT, RFD-TV, and now Circle TV. In spite of the popularity among its fans, the program has never been a favorite of television critics or reviewers; the "Hee Haw Honeys" spin-off, in particular, was cited in a 2002 "TV Guide" article as one of the 10 worst television series ever.
In the third season episode of "The Simpsons" "Colonel Homer", "Hee Haw" is parodied as the TV show "Ya Hoo!".
On at least four episodes of the animated Fox series "Family Guy", when the storyline hits a dead-end, a cutaway to Conway Twitty performing a song is inserted. The hand-off is done in "Hee Haw" style, and often uses actual footage of Twitty performing on the show.
Lulu Roman released a new album titled "At Last" on January 15, 2013. The album features Lulu's versions of 12 classics and standards, including guest appearances by Dolly Parton, T. Graham Brown, Linda Davis, and Georgette Jones (daughter of George Jones and Tammy Wynette).
The series was referenced in "The Critic" as a parody crossover with "Star Trek The Next Generation" under the title of "Hee Haw The Next Generation", where the characters of the "Star Trek" series act out as the cast of "Hee Haw".

