
The Hahn–Banach theorem is a central tool in functional analysis. 
It allows the extension of bounded linear functionals defined on a subspace of some vector space to the whole space, and it also shows that there are "enough" continuous linear functionals defined on every normed vector space to make the study of the dual space "interesting". Another version of the Hahn–Banach theorem is known as the Hahn–Banach separation theorem or the hyperplane separation theorem, and has numerous uses in convex geometry.
History.
The theorem is named for the mathematicians Hans Hahn and Stefan Banach, who proved it independently in the late 1920s. 
The special case of the theorem for the space formula_1 of continuous functions on an interval was proved earlier (in 1912) by Eduard Helly, and a more general extension theorem, the M. Riesz extension theorem, from which the Hahn–Banach theorem can be derived, was proved in 1923 by Marcel Riesz.
The first Hahn–Banach theorem was proved by Eduard Helly in 1921 who showed that certain linear functionals defined on a subspace of a certain type of normed space (formula_2) had an extension of the same norm. Helly did this through the technique of first proving that a one-dimensional extension exists (where the linear functional has its domain extended by one dimension) and then using induction. In 1927, Hahn defined general Banach spaces and used Helly's technique to prove a norm preserving version of Hahn–Banach theorem for Banach spaces (where a bounded linear functional on a subspace has a bounded linear extension of the same norm to the whole space). In 1929, Banach, who was unaware of Hahn's result, generalized it by replacing the norm-preserving version with the dominated extension version that uses sublinear functions. Whereas Helly's proof used mathematical induction, Hahn and Banach both used transfinite induction.
The Hahn–Banach theorem arose from attempts to solve infinite systems of linear equations. This is needed to solve problems such as the moment problem, whereby given all the potential moments of a function one must determine if a function having these moments exists, and, if so, find it in terms of those moments. Another such problem is the Fourier cosine series problem, whereby given all the potential Fourier cosine coefficients one must determine if a function having those coefficients exists, and, again, find it if so.
Riesz and Helly solved the problem for certain classes of spaces (such as L"p"([0, 1]) and C(["a", "b"])) where they discovered that the existence of a solution was equivalent to the existence and continuity of certain linear functionals. In effect, they needed to solve the following problem: 
To solve this, if is reflexive then it suffices to solve the following dual problem:
Riesz went on to define () in 1910 and the spaces in 1913. While investigating these spaces he proved a special case of the Hahn–Banach theorem. Helly also proved a special case of the Hahn–Banach theorem in 1912. In 1910, Riesz solved the functional problem for some specific spaces and in 1912, Helly solved it for a more general class of spaces. It wasn't until 1932 that Banach, in one of the first important applications of the Hahn–Banach theorem, solved the general functional problem. The following theorem states the general functional problem and characterizes its solution.
One can use the above theorem to deduce the Hahn–Banach theorem. If is reflexive, then this theorem solves the vector problem.
Hahn–Banach theorem.
The extension is in general not uniquely specified by and the proof gives no explicit method as to how to find .
It is possible to relax slightly the subadditivity condition on , requiring only that for all and all scalars and satisfying ,
It is further possible to relax the positive homogeneity and the subadditivity conditions on , requiring only that is convex.
The Mizar project has completely formalized and automatically checked the proof of the Hahn–Banach theorem in the HAHNBAN file.
Proof.
In the complex case, the -linearity assumptions demand that for some real vector space . Moreover, for every vector , . Thus the real part of a linear functional already determines the behavior of the linear functional as a whole, and proving the real case will suffice.
First, we note Helly's initial result: if has codimension 1, then Hahn-Banach is easy.
Now apply Zorn's lemma: the possible extensions of are partially ordered by extension of each other, so there is a maximal extension . By the codimension-1 result, if is not defined on all of , then it can be further extended. Thus must be defined everywhere, as claimed.
In locally convex spaces.
In the above form, the functional to be extended must already be bounded by a sublinear function. In some applications, this might close to begging the question. However, in locally convex spaces, any continuous functional is already bounded by the norm, which is sublinear. One thus hasIn category-theoretic terms, the field is an injective object in the category of locally convex vector spaces.
Relation to axiom of choice.
The above proof uses Zorn's lemma, which is equivalent to the axiom of choice. It is now known (see below) that the ultrafilter lemma (or equivalently, the Boolean prime ideal theorem), which is slightly weaker than the axiom of choice, is actually strong enough.
The Hahn–Banach theorem is equivalent to the following:
In Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, one can show that the Hahn–Banach theorem is enough to derive the existence of a non-Lebesgue measurable set. Moreover, the Hahn–Banach theorem implies the Banach–Tarski paradox.
For separable Banach spaces, D. K. Brown and S. G. Simpson proved that the Hahn–Banach theorem follows from WKL0, a weak subsystem of second-order arithmetic that takes a form of Kőnig's lemma restricted to binary trees as an axiom. In fact, they prove that under a weak set of assumptions, the two are equivalent, an example of reverse mathematics.
"Geometric Hahn–Banach" (the Hahn–Banach separation theorems).
The key element of the Hahn–Banach theorem is fundamentally a result about the separation of two convex sets: }, and }. This sort of argument appears widely in convex geometry, optimization theory, and economics. Lemmas to this end derived from the original Hahn–Banach theorem are known as the Hahn–Banach separation theorems.
Often one assumes that the convex sets have additional structure; i.e. that they are open or compact. In that case, the conclusion can be substantially strengthened:
If is complex, then the same claims hold, but for the real part of .
One important corollary is known as the Geometric Hahn–Banach theorem or Mazur's theorem.
To see that Mazur's theorem follows from the Hahn-Banach separation theorems, note that is convex and apply the first bullet. Mazur's theorem clarifies that vector subspaces (even ones that are not closed) can be characterized by linear functionals. 
Supporting hyperplanes.
Since points are trivially convex, geometric Hahn-Banach implies that functionals can detect the boundary of a set. In particular, let be a real topological vector space and be convex with . If formula_7 then there is a functional that is vanishing at , but supported on the interior of .
Call a normed space smooth if at each point in its unit ball there exists a unique closed hyperplane to the unit ball at . Köthe showed in 1983 that a normed space is smooth at a point if and only if the norm is Gateaux differentiable at that point.
Balanced or disked neighborhoods.
Let be a convex balanced neighborhood of 0 in a locally convex topological vector space and suppose is not an element of . Then there exists a continuous linear functional on such that
Applications.
The Hahn–Banach theorem is the first sign of an important philosophy in functional analysis: to understand a space, one should understand its continuous functionals.
For example, linear subspaces are characterized by functionals: if is a normed vector space with linear subspace (not necessarily closed) and if is an element of not in the closure of , then there exists a continuous linear map with for all in , , and . (To see this, note that is a sublinear function.) Moreover, if is an element of , then there exists a continuous linear map such that and . This implies that the natural injection from a normed space into its double dual is isometric.
That last result also suggests that the Hahn–Banach theorem can often be used to locate a "nicer" topology in which to work. For example, many results in functional analysis assume that a space is Hausdorff or locally convex. However, suppose is a topological vector space, not necessarily Hausdorff or locally convex, but with a nonempty, proper, convex, open set . Then geometric Hahn-Banach implies that there is a hyperplane separating from any other point. In particular, there must exist a nonzero functional on — that is, the continuous dual space is non-trivial. Considering with the weak topology induced by , then becomes locally convex; by the second bullet of geometric Hahn-Banach, the weak topology on this new space separates points. Thus with this weak topology becomes Hausdorff. This sometimes allows some results from locally convex topological vector spaces to be applied to non-Hausdorff and non-locally convex spaces.
Partial differential equations.
The Hahn–Banach theorem is often useful when one wishes to apply the method of a priori estimates. Suppose that we wish to solve the linear differential equation for , with given in some Banach space . If we have control on the size of in terms of formula_8 and we can think of as a bounded linear functional on some suitable space of test functions , then we can view as a linear functional by adjunction: formula_9. At first, this functional is only defined on the image of , but using the Hahn–Banach theorem, we can try to extend it to the entire codomain . The resulting functional is often defined to be a weak solution to the equation.
Example from Fredholm theory.
To illustrate an actual application of the Hahn–Banach theorem, we will now prove a result that follows almost entirely from the Hahn–Banach theorem.
One may use the above result to show that every closed vector subspace of is complemented and either finite dimensional or else TVS-isomorphic to .
Generalizations.
There are now many other versions of the Hahn–Banach theorem. The general template for the various versions of the Hahn–Banach theorem presented in this article is as follows:
For seminorms.
A proof runs as follows: let be the convex hull of }. Note that is an absorbing disk in , and call its Minkowski functional . Then on and on .
For nonlinear functions.
The following theorem of Mazur–Orlicz (1953) is equivalent to the Hahn–Banach theorem.
The following theorem characterizes when "any" scalar function on (not necessarily linear) has a continuous linear extension to all of .
Converse.
Let be a topological vector space. A vector subspace of has the extension property if any continuous linear functional on can be extended to a continuous linear functional on , and we say that has the Hahn–Banach extension property (HBEP) if every vector subspace of has the extension property.
The Hahn–Banach theorem guarantees that every Hausdorff locally convex space has the HBEP. For complete metrizable topological vector spaces there is a converse, due to Kalton: every complete metrizable TVS with the Hahn–Banach extension property is locally convex. On the other hand, a vector space of uncountable dimension, endowed with the finest vector topology, then this is a topological vector spaces with the Hahn-Banach extension property that is neither locally convex nor metrizable.
A vector subspace of a TVS has the separation property if for every element of such that , there exists a continuous linear functional on such that and for all . Clearly, the continuous dual space of a TVS separates points on if and only if } has the separation property. In 1992, Kakol proved that any infinite dimensional vector space , there exist TVS-topologies on that do not have the HBEP despite having enough continuous linear functionals for the continuous dual space to separate points on . However, if is a TVS then "every" vector subspace of has the extension property if and only if "every" vector subspace of has the separation property.

