
The high jump is a track and field event in which competitors must jump unaided over a horizontal bar placed at measured heights without dislodging it. In its modern most practiced format, a bar is placed between two standards with a crash mat for landing. In the modern era, athletes run towards the bar and use the Fosbury Flop method of jumping, leaping head first with their back to the bar. Since ancient times, competitors have introduced increasingly effective techniques to arrive at the current form.
The discipline is, alongside the pole vault, one of two vertical clearance events to feature on the Olympic athletics program. It is contested at the World Championships in Athletics and IAAF World Indoor Championships, and is a common occurrence at track and field meetings. The high jump was among the first events deemed acceptable for women, having been held at the 1928 Olympic Games.
Javier Sotomayor (Cuba) is the current men's record holder with a jump of set in 1993 – the longest standing record in the history of the men's high jump. Stefka Kostadinova (Bulgaria) has held the women's world record at since 1987, also the longest-held record in the event.
Rules.
The rules for the high jump are set internationally by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF). Jumpers must take off on one foot. A jump is considered a failure if the bar is dislodged by the action of the jumper whilst jumping or the jumper touches the ground or breaks the plane of the near edge of the bar before clearance. The technique one uses for the jump must be almost flawless in order to have a chance of clearing a high bar.
Competitors may begin jumping at any height announced by the chief judge, or may pass, at their own discretion. Most competitions state that three consecutive missed jumps, at any height or combination of heights, will eliminate the jumper from competition.
The victory goes to the jumper who clears the greatest height during the final. Tie-breakers are used for any place in which scoring occurs. If two or more jumpers tie for one of these places, the tie-breakers are: 1) the fewest misses at the height at which the tie occurred; and 2) the fewest misses throughout the competition.
If the event remains tied for first place (or a limited advancement position to a subsequent meet), the jumpers have a jump-off, beginning at the next greater height. Each jumper has one attempt. The bar is then alternately lowered and raised until only one jumper succeeds at a given height.
History.
The first recorded high jump event took place in Scotland in the 19th century. Early jumpers used either an elaborate straight-on approach or a scissors technique. In later years, soon then after, the bar was approached diagonally, and the jumper threw first the inside leg and then the other over the bar in a scissoring motion. Around the turn of the 20th century, techniques began to change, beginning with the Irish-American Michael Sweeney's "Eastern cut-off". By taking off like the scissors and extending his spine and flattening out over the bar, Sweeney raised the world record to in 1895.
Another American, George Horine, developed an even more efficient technique, the "Western roll". In this style, the bar again is approached on a diagonal, but the inner leg is used for the take-off, while the outer leg is thrust up to lead the body sideways over the bar. Horine increased the world standard to in 1912. His technique was predominant through the Berlin Olympics of 1936, in which the event was won by Cornelius Johnson at .
American and Soviet jumpers were the most successful for the next four decades, and they pioneered the evolution of the straddle technique. Straddle jumpers took off as in the Western roll, but rotated their (belly-down) torso around the bar, obtaining the most efficient and highest clearance (of the bar) up to that time. Straddle-jumper, Charles Dumas, was the first to clear 7 feet (2.13 m), in 1956, American John Thomas pushed the world mark to in 1960. Valeriy Brumel took over the event for the next four years. The elegant Soviet jumper radically sped up his approach run, took the record up to , and won the Olympic gold medal in 1964, before a motorcycle accident ended his career.
American coaches, including two-time NCAA champion Frank Costello of the University of Maryland, flocked to Russia to learn from Brumel and his coaches. However, it would be a solitary innovator at Oregon State University, Dick Fosbury, who would bring the high jump into the next century.
Taking advantage of the raised, softer, artificially-cushioned landing areas by then in use, Fosbury added a new twist to the outmoded Eastern Cut-off. He directed himself over the bar head and shoulders first, sliding over on his back and landing in a fashion which would likely have resulted in serious injury in the old ground-level landing pits usually filled with sawdust or sand mixtures.
After he used this Fosbury flop to win the 1968 Olympic gold medal, the technique began to spread around the world, and soon "floppers" were dominating international high jump competitions. The last straddler to set a world record was Vladimir Yashchenko, who cleared in 1977 and then indoors in 1978.
Among renowned high jumpers following Fosbury's lead were Americans Dwight Stones and his rival, tall Franklin Jacobs of Paterson, NJ, who cleared , over his head (a feat equalled 27 years later by Sweden's Stefan Holm); Chinese record-setters Ni-chi Chin and Zhu Jianhua; Germans Gerd Wessig and Dietmar Mögenburg; Swedish Olympic medalist and former world record holder Patrik Sjöberg; and female jumpers Iolanda Balaş of Romania, Ulrike Meyfarth of Germany and Italy's Sara Simeoni.
Technical aspects.
Step by step.
The most important aspect to put of all pieces of the jump together is the body mechanics the jumper uses to jump. Technique and form has evolved greatly over the history of high jump. The popularity of a style depend upon the time period as listed here:
The Fosbury Flop is currently deemed as the most efficient way for competitors of the event to propel themselves over the bar. Still depending on the individual athletes specific strengths and weaknesses there are variations on the separate pieces that make up the jump.
Approach.
For a Fosbury flop depending on the athletes jump foot they will start on the right of left of the mat. Placing their jump foot furthest away from the high jump mat. The athlete will have an eight to ten step approach in total, the last five steps being a curve with three or five steps before on a straight. The athlete will want to mark their approach to attempt to find as much consistency as possible.
The approach run of the high jump may actually be more important than the take-off. If a high jumper runs with bad timing or without enough aggression, clearing a high bar becomes more of a challenge. The approach requires a certain shape or curve, the right amount of speed, and the correct number of strides. The approach angle is also critical for optimal height.
The straight run will build the momentum and set the tone for the athletes jump. The athlete will start by pushing off with the take off foot with slow powerful steps then begin to quicken and accelerate them. The athlete should be tall and running up right by the end of their three or five steps.
On the first step of the curve the athletes take off foot will be landing, they will want to continue accelerating and curving focusing the body towards the opposite back corner of the high jump mat. While staying tall, erect, and leaning away from the mat the athlete should make sure that their final two steps are flat footed, rolling from the heel to toe as well as being the quickest steps.
Most great straddle jumpers have a run at angles of about 30 to 40 degrees. The length of the run is determined by the speed of the person's approach. A slower run requires about 8 strides. However, a faster high jumper might need about 13 strides. A greater run speed allows a greater part of the body's forward momentum to be converted upward.
The J type approach, favored by Fosbury floppers, allows for horizontal speed, the ability to turn in the air (centripetal force), and good take-off position. This allows for horizontal momentum to turn into vertical momentum, propelling the jumper off the ground and over the bar. The approach should be a hard controlled stride so that a person does not fall from creating an angle with speed. Athletes should run tall and lean on the curve, from the ankles and not the hips. This allows the correct angle to force their hips to rotate during take-off, which allows their center of gravity to pass under the bar.
Take-off.
The take off can have slight variations depending on what feels most natural to the athlete. The double arm take off and the single arm take off. With most things in common, for both the athlete should make sure not to take off at the center of the bar. The plant foot should be the foot furthest away from the bar, angled towards the opposite back corner of the matt, and driving the non take off leg knee up. Keeping in mind this is a vertical jump pushing all force straight up. This will be accompanied with a one or two arm swing while driving the knee.
Unlike the classic straddle technique, where the take-off foot is "planted" in the same spot at every height, flop-style jumpers must adjust their take-off as the bar is raised. Their approach run must be adjusted slightly so that their take-off spot is slightly further out from the bar in order to allow their hips to clear the bar while still maintaining enough momentum to carry their legs across the bar. Jumpers attempting to reach record heights commonly fail when most of their energy is directed into the vertical effort, and they brush the bar off the standards with the backs of their legs as they stall out in mid-air.
An effective approach shape can be derived from physics. For example, the rate of backward spin required as the jumper crosses the bar to facilitate shoulder clearance on the way up and foot clearance on the way down can be determined by computer simulation. This rotation rate can be back-calculated to determine the required angle of lean away from the bar at plant, based on how long the jumper is on the take-off foot. This information, together with the jumper's speed in the curve, can be used to calculate the radius of the curved part of the approach. This is a lot of work and requires measurements of running speed and time of take-off foot on the ground. However, one can work in the opposite direction by assuming an approach radius and watching the resulting backward rotation. This only works if some basic rules are followed in how one executes the approach and take-off. 
Drills can be practiced to solidify the approach. One drill is to run in a straight line (the linear part of the approach) and then run two to three circles spiraling into one another. Another is to run or skip a circle of any size, two to three times in a row. It is important to train to leap upwards without first leaning into the bar, allowing the momentum of the J approach to carry the body across the bar.
Flight.
The athlete's non take off leg knee will naturally turn their body placing them in the air with their back to the bar. The athlete will then drive their shoulders to the back of their feet arching their body over the bar. The athlete can look over their right shoulder then judge appropriately when to kick both feet over their head causing their body to miss the bar and land on the mat.
Training.
In high jump, it helps if the athlete is tall, has long legs, and limited weight on their body. They must have a strong lower body and flexibility will help a lot as well. High jumpers tend to go through very vigorous training methods to achieve this ideal body frame.
Sprinting.
High jumpers must have a fast approach so it is crucial to work on speed and also speed endurance. Many high jump competitions may take hours and athletes must make sure they have the endurance to last the entire competition. Common sprint endurance workouts for high jumpers include 200-, 400-, and 800-meter training. Other speed endurance training methods such as hill training or a ladder workout may also be used.
Weight lifting.
It is crucial for high jumpers to have strong lower bodies and cores, as the bar progressively gets higher, the strength of an athlete's legs (along with speed and technique) will help propel them over the bar. Squats, deadlifts, and core exercises will help a high jumper to achieve these goals. It is important, however, for a high jumper to keep a slim figure as any unnecessary weight makes it difficult to jump higher.
Plyometrics.
Arguably the most important training for a high jumper is plyometric training. Because high jump is such a technical event, any mistake in the technique could either lead to failure, injury, or both. To prevent these from happening, high jumpers tend to focus heavily on plyometrics. This includes hurdle jumps, flexibility training, skips, or scissor kick training. Plyometric workouts tend to be performed at the beginning of the workout.
Athletes with most medals.
Athletes who have won multiple titles at the two most important competitions, the Olympic Games and the World Championships:
Kostadinova and Sotomayor are the only high jumpers to have been Olympic Champion, World Champion and broken the world record.
Height differentials.
All time lists of athletes with the highest recorded jumps above their own height.
Female two metres club.
, 77 different female athletes had ever been able to jump .

