
In computational mathematics, an iterative method is a mathematical procedure that uses an initial value to generate a sequence of improving approximate solutions for a class of problems, in which the "n"-th approximation is derived from the previous ones. A specific implementation of an iterative method, including the termination criteria, is an algorithm of the iterative method. An iterative method is called convergent if the corresponding sequence converges for given initial approximations. A mathematically rigorous convergence analysis of an iterative method is usually performed; however, heuristic-based iterative methods are also common.
In contrast, direct methods attempt to solve the problem by a finite sequence of operations. In the absence of rounding errors, direct methods would deliver an exact solution (like solving a linear system of equations formula_1 by Gaussian elimination). Iterative methods are often the only choice for nonlinear equations. However, iterative methods are often useful even for linear problems involving many variables (sometimes of the order of millions), where direct methods would be prohibitively expensive (and in some cases impossible) even with the best available computing power.
Attractive fixed points.
If an equation can be put into the form "f"("x") = "x", and a solution x is an attractive fixed point of the function "f", then one may begin with a point "x"1 in the basin of attraction of x, and let "x""n"+1 = "f"("x""n") for "n" ≥ 1, and the sequence {"x""n"}"n" ≥ 1 will converge to the solution x. Here "x""n" is the "n"th approximation or iteration of "x" and "x""n"+1 is the next or "n" + 1 iteration of "x". Alternately, superscripts in parentheses are often used in numerical methods, so as not to interfere with subscripts with other meanings. (For example, "x"("n"+1) = "f"("x"("n")).) If the function "f" is continuously differentiable, a sufficient condition for convergence is that the spectral radius of the derivative is strictly bounded by one in a neighborhood of the fixed point. If this condition holds at the fixed point, then a sufficiently small neighborhood (basin of attraction) must exist.
Linear systems.
In the case of a system of linear equations, the two main classes of iterative methods are the stationary iterative methods, and the more general Krylov subspace methods.
Stationary iterative methods.
Introduction.
Stationary iterative methods solve a linear system with an operator approximating the original one; and based on a measurement of the error in the result (the residual), form a "correction equation" for which this process is repeated. While these methods are simple to derive, implement, and analyze, convergence is only guaranteed for a limited class of matrices.
Definition.
An "iterative method" is defined by
and for a given linear system formula_3 with exact solution formula_4 the "error" by
An iterative method is called "linear" if there exists a matrix formula_6 such that
and this matrix is called the "iteration matrix".
An iterative method with a given iteration matrix formula_8 is called "convergent" if the following holds
An important theorem states that for a given iterative method and its iteration matrix formula_8 it is convergent if and only if its spectral radius formula_11 is smaller than unity, that is,
The basic iterative methods work by splitting the matrix formula_13 into
and here the matrix formula_15 should be easily invertible.
The iterative methods are now defined as
From this follows that the iteration matrix is given by
Examples.
Basic examples of stationary iterative methods use a splitting of the matrix formula_13 such as
where formula_20 is only the diagonal part of formula_13, and formula_22 is the strict lower triangular part of formula_13.
Respectively, formula_24 is the strict upper triangular part of formula_13.
Linear stationary iterative methods are also called relaxation methods.
Krylov subspace methods.
Krylov subspace methods work by forming a basis of the sequence of successive matrix powers times the initial residual (the Krylov sequence). 
The approximations to the solution are then formed by minimizing the residual over the subspace formed. 
The prototypical method in this class is the conjugate gradient method (CG) which assumes that the system matrix formula_13 is symmetric positive-definite.
For symmetric (and possibly indefinite) formula_13 one works with the minimal residual method (MINRES).
In the case of non-symmetric matrices, methods such as the generalized minimal residual method (GMRES) and the biconjugate gradient method (BiCG) have been derived.
Convergence of Krylov subspace methods.
Since these methods form a basis, it is evident that the method converges in "N" iterations, where "N" is the system size. However, in the presence of rounding errors this statement does not hold; moreover, in practice "N" can be very large, and the iterative process reaches sufficient accuracy already far earlier. The analysis of these methods is hard, depending on a complicated function of the spectrum of the operator.
Preconditioners.
The approximating operator that appears in stationary iterative methods can also be incorporated in Krylov subspace methods such as GMRES (alternatively, preconditioned Krylov methods can be considered as accelerations of stationary iterative methods), where they become transformations of the original operator to a presumably better conditioned one. The construction of preconditioners is a large research area.
History.
Probably the first iterative method for solving a linear system appeared in a letter of Gauss to a student of his. He proposed solving a 4-by-4 system of equations by repeatedly solving the component in which the residual was the largest .
The theory of stationary iterative methods was solidly established with the work of D.M. Young starting in the 1950s. The Conjugate Gradient method was also invented in the 1950s, with independent developments by Cornelius Lanczos, Magnus Hestenes and Eduard Stiefel, but its nature and applicability were misunderstood at the time. Only in the 1970s was it realized that conjugacy based methods work very well for partial differential equations, especially the elliptic type.

