
James Hamilton, 1st Earl of Abercorn (1575–1618) was a Scottish diplomat for James VI and I and an undertaker in the Plantation of Ulster, Ireland.
Birth and origins.
James was born on 12 August 1575, probably at Paisley, Scotland, the eldest son of Claud Hamilton and his wife Margaret Seton. His father was the first Lord Paisley. His paternal grandfather was James Hamilton, 2nd Earl of Arran. James's mother was a daughter of George Seton, 7th Lord Seton.
 Both parents were Scottish. They had married in 1574.
Several of his siblings died in their infancy or childhood. Six reached adulthood:
Early life.
Nothing seems to be known about his youth. As eldest son he was given the courtesy title of Master of Paisley after the Scottish habit.
Marriage and children.
Shortly before or in 1592, Master Paisley married Marion, daughter of Thomas Boyd, 6th Lord Boyd. Marion was a prominent Roman Catholic and would in 1628 be excommunicated by the synod of the Church of Scotland in Glasgow after his death.
James and Marion had nine children, five boys:
—and four girls:
Life in Scotland.
In 1597, Master Paisley sat for Linlithgow in the Parliament of Scotland. He was also made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber and a member of the Privy Council to James VI of Scotland. In 1600, the King created him hereditary Sheriff of Linlithgow.
On 24 March 1603 James VI also became King of England as James I and from there on reigned both kingdoms in personal union.
On 5 April 1603, Master Paisley was created Lord Abercorn, of Linlithgowshire. This made him the first of the long line of earls, then marquesses, and finally dukes of Abercorn.
His wife was a close friend of Anne of Denmark. In May 1603 Anne of Denmark came to Stirling Castle hoping to collect her son Prince Henry, who was in the keeping of the Earl of Mar. Anne fainted at dinner and when Jean Drummond and Marion Boyd, Mistress of Paisley, carried her to bed she had a miscarriage. The lawyer Thomas Haddington wrote an account of these events, and said the queen had told her physician Martin Schöner and the Mistress of Paisley that she had taken "some balm water that hastened her abort".
In 1604, Lord Abercorn, as he was now, served on a royal commission established to consider the union of the crowns of England and Scotland. Though the project failed, the king was content with his services. He received large grants of lands in Scotland.
On 10 July 1606 he was further honoured by being created Earl of Abercorn, Baron Paisley, Baron Hamilton, Baron Mountcastell, and Baron Kilpatrick. The family tree shows how the Abercorn title was inherited moving at the death of the 3rd Earl to the descendants of the 2nd son, Claud, and then at the death of the 5th Earl to the descendants of his 4th son, George.
Irish Plantation.
Lord Abercorn, as he was now, and his brothers Claud and George were undertakers in James VI and I's 1611 Plantations of Ireland. He was given pieces of land called Strabane, Donnalonge and Shean in County Tyrone that had been confiscated from the O'Neill clan. He built a castle at Strabane. His brother Claude, called "of Shawfield", was given land in County Cavan. His brother George, called "of Greenlaw and Rosscrea", would found the village of Ballymagorry, north of Strabane, where the townland of Greenlaw is, and build the castle or manor of Derrywoone, situated on the present-day Baronscourt estate.
On 11 March 1613/4, he was summoned to attend the Parliament of Ireland and was granted the precedence of an earl in Ireland (confirmed by royal warrant on 31 March), although he had never been created a peer in that realm. He was appointed to the Council of Munster on 20 May 1615.
Death, succession, and timeline.
Lord Abercorn died on 23 March 1618, at Monkton, Ayrshire, Scotland, predeceasing his father and was buried on 29 April 1618 in Paisley Abbey church.
He predeceased his father by three years and therefore never became Lord Paisley, but, having been created Earl of Abercorn, he did not miss this title. His eldest son, James, aged 14, succeeded him as the 2nd Earl of Abercorn. His widow died in Edinburgh in 1632. His brother, Sir George Hamilton of Greenlaw and Roscrea, helped to bring up the children and to convert them to the Catholic religion.

