
Jadavpur University is a technical and research university located in Kolkata in the state of West Bengal in India. It was established in 1905.
History.
In 1905, after the partition of Bengal, the National Council of Education (NCE) was setup by the joint efforts of Raja Subodh Chandra Mallik, Brajendra Kishore Roy Chowdhury, Sir Rash Behari Ghosh (first President of NCE), Rabindranath Tagore and Sri Aurobindo Ghosh. Its primary aim was to impart literary, scientific and technical education on national lines exclusively under national control.
In 1910 the Society for the Promotion of Technical Education in Bengal which looked after Bengal Technical Institute (which later became College of Engineering and Technology, Bengal) was amalgamated to NCE. NCE henceforth looked after the College of Engineering and Technology, Bengal. 
After Independence, on the 24th of December 1955, Jadavpur University was officially established by the Government of West Bengal with the concurrence of the Government of India.
Campus.
Jadavpur University is semi-residential, which at present operates out of two urban campuses: one in Jadavpur () and another in Salt Lake ().
Jagadish Chandra Bose Centre for Advanced Technology.
DRDO has established Jagadish Chandra Bose Centre of Advanced Technology (JCBCAT) at Jadavpur University to undertake and facilitate multidisciplinary directed basic and applied research in the following identified research verticals :
National Instruments Limited Campus.
Jadavpur University has acquired the erstwhile National Instruments Limited (CSIR), becoming the first Indian university to acquire such a research unit. It is on a nine-acre plot opposite the main campus. After renovation, the new campus is expected to add much-needed space for new laboratories especially for the Departments of Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, and Computer Science &amp; Engineering. The NIL campus is to be connected to the main campus by an underground tunnel to bypass the traffic on the busy Raja S.C. Mullick Road.
Organisation and administration.
Governance.
In 2015, Suranjan Das was appointed as the vice-chancellor of Jadavpur University.
Faculties.
The departments of Jadavpur University are divided into three faculties. 
Affiliated institutes.
In addition to being a unitary university, it has other institutes like the J D Birla Institute, and the Institute of Business Management affiliated to it, which operate out of independent campuses. While these institutes have their own independent curriculum as well as examination systems, the final degree is offered by Jadavpur University.
To facilitate interdisciplinary learning and research in diverse fields, there are a number of schools and centre for studies. Some of the major research ventures undertaken by these schools include the pioneering work done by the School of Environmental Studies in highlighting the presence of arsenic in groundwater in countries like India and Bangladesh and the development of the first alcohol based car by the School of Automobile Engineering.
The centres for studies are usually directly associated with a particular department in Jadavpur University
In March 2011, Indian American scientist Manick Sorcar assisted in the opening of a laser animation lab under the School of Illumination Science, Engineering and Design.
Academics.
Rankings.
Internationally, Jadavpur University ranked 651-700 by the "QS World University Rankings" in 2021, 136 in Asia in 2020 and 75 among BRICS nations in 2019. It was ranked 801-1000 in the world by the "Times Higher Education World University Rankings" of 2020, 196 in Asia and 178 among Emerging Economies University Rankings in 2020. It was also ranked 772 in the world by "U.S. News &amp; World Report". The university was ranked 543rd in the world by "CWTS Leiden Ranking" in 2017, for the period 2012–2015.
The "National Institutional Ranking Framework" has ranked it 17 among engineering institutes in India in 2020, 12 overall and 5th among universities.
Publishing.
The university press publishes all documents of record in the university including PhD theses, question papers and journals. On 26 October 2010 the institution announced plans to launch a publication house, named Jadavpur University Press. The main focus of the publication house will be to publish textbooks and thesis written by research scholars and authors from all universities. The first two titles of JUP were launched on 1 February 2012 at the Calcutta Book Fair. The two titles were "Rajpurush" (translation of Niccolò Machiavelli's "Il Principe"); translated by Doyeeta Majumder, with an introduction by Swapan Kumar Chakravorty, and "Shilpachinta" (translation of selections from Leonardo da Vinci's notebooks); translated by Sukanta Chaudhuri. Both books were translated from the original Italian.
Notable alumni.
 
Alumni of this university are known as 'Jadavpurians', or in Bangla as 'যদুবংশ'(Joduclan). The Alumni Association, one of the oldest in the country, was founded in 1921 by the ex-students of the National Council of Education.
Controversy and criticism.
In 2014 a series of protests broke out in response to the alleged molestation of a female student and beating of a male student by 10 other students on 28 August 2014. Her family and ultimately the student body were unsatisfied by the response of the Vice Chancellor to the allegations. Protests began on 10 September. On 16 September students gheraoed several officials in their offices, demanding that the Vice Chancellor make a statement on the status of a fair probe. Police were summoned, and later that night the police allegedly attacked and beat the student demonstrators. 30 to 40 students were injured; some had to be hospitalized. Reaction was nationwide, with supportive protests at multiple other cities including New Delhi, Hyderabad and Bangalore. On 20 September, Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi, who is also the chancellor of the university, met with student representatives and promised to conduct an impartial inquiry. However, students said they will continue to boycott classes until the Vice Chancellor resigns.
On 26 September, a State Government inquiry panel submitted its report, confirming that the female student had indeed been sexually abused on 28 August 2014. On 26 September, police summoned two Jadavpur University students to come to the Lalbazar Police HQ for questioning at 4 pm on Friday. They were arrested at 6 pm. "The arrests were made after evidence was found, prima facie, against the duo. Further investigation is on," said joint CP-crime Pallab Kanti Ghosh. Mr Ghosh also stated, "(Two names) were arrested because we had enough evidence to prove that they were present at the spot and had carried out the crime as alleged in the victim's complaint." The duo were booked under Sections of 354 (assault or use of criminal force on a woman with the intent to outrage her modesty), 342 (wrongful confinement), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) and 114 (abettor present when offence is committed) of the IPC.
JU has been embroiled in controversies since July 4, 2018 when the executive council announced its decision to scrap entrance tests for six subjects which was met with protests from the Jadavpur University Teacher's Association and the student unions along with other academics and University students.

