
The are syllabaries used to write Japanese phonological units, morae. Such syllabaries include: (1) the original kana, or , which were Chinese characters (kanji) used phonetically to transcribe Japanese; the most prominent magana system being ; the two descendants of man'yōgana, (2) cursive , and (3) angular . There are also , which are historical variants of the now standard hiragana. In current usage, "kana" can simply mean "hiragana" and "katakana".
Katakana, with a few additions, are also used to write Ainu. A number of systems exist to write the Ryūkyūan languages, in particular Okinawan, in hiragana. Taiwanese kana were used in Taiwanese Hokkien as glosses (ruby text or "furigana") for Chinese characters in Taiwan when it was under Japanese rule.
Each kana character (syllabogram) corresponds to one sound in the Japanese language, unlike kanji regular script corresponding to meaning (logogram). That is why the character system is named kana, literally "false name". Apart from the five vowels, this is always CV (consonant onset with vowel nucleus), such as "ka", "ki", etc., or V (vowel), such as "a", "i", etc., with the sole exception of the C grapheme for nasal codas usually romanised as "n". This structure has led some scholars to label the system "moraic" instead of "syllabic", because it requires the combination of two syllabograms to represent a CVC syllable with coda (i.e. CV"n", CV"m", CV"ng"), a CVV syllable with complex nucleus (i.e. multiple or expressively long vowels), or a CCV syllable with complex onset (i.e. including a glide, C"y"V, C"w"V).
Due to the limited number of phonemes in Japanese, as well as the relatively rigid syllable structure, the kana system is a very accurate representation of spoken Japanese.
Etymology.
"Kana" is a compound of and , which eventually collapsed into "kanna" and ultimately "kana".
As the name suggests, "kana" were "false" kanji due to their purely phonetic nature, as opposed to which were "true" kanji used for their meanings. In current usage, however, since such "false" kanji have long been obsolete, and phonetic kanji are now only restricted to what is known specifically as "ateji", the term "kana" simply refers to hiragana and katakana, and it contrasts with "kanji" altogether.
Terms.
Although the term "kana" is now commonly understood as hiragana and katakana, it actually has broader application as listed below:
Hiragana and katakana.
The following table reads, in gojūon order, as "a", "i", "u", "e", "o" (down first column), then "ka", "ki", "ku", "ke", "ko" (down second column), and so on. "n" appears on its own at the end. Asterisks mark unused combinations.
Diacritics.
Syllables beginning with the voiced consonants [g], [z], [d] and [b] are spelled with kana from the corresponding unvoiced columns ("k", "s", "t" and "h") and the voicing mark, "dakuten". Syllables beginning with [p] are spelled with kana from the "h" column and the half-voicing mark, "handakuten".
Digraphs.
Syllables beginning with palatalized consonants are spelled with one of the seven consonantal kana from the "i" row followed by small "ya", "yu" or "yo". These digraphs are called yōon.
Modern usage.
The difference in usage between hiragana and katakana is stylistic. Usually, hiragana is the default syllabary, and katakana is used in certain special cases.
Hiragana is used to write native Japanese words with no kanji representation (or whose kanji is thought obscure or difficult), as well as grammatical elements such as particles and inflections (okurigana).
Today katakana is most commonly used to write words of foreign origin that do not have kanji representations, as well as foreign personal and place names. Katakana is also used to represent onomatopoeia and interjections, emphasis, technical and scientific terms, transcriptions of the Sino-Japanese readings of kanji, and some corporate branding.
Kana can be written in small form above or next to lesser-known kanji in order to show pronunciation; this is called furigana. Furigana is used most widely in children's or learners' books. Literature for young children who do not yet know kanji may dispense with it altogether and instead use hiragana combined with spaces.
History.
The first kana was a system called "man'yōgana," a set of kanji used solely for their phonetic values, much as Chinese uses characters for their phonetic values in foreign loanwords (especially proper nouns) today. "Man'yōshū", a poetry anthology assembled in 759, is written in this early script. Hiragana developed as a distinct script from cursive "man'yōgana", whereas katakana developed from abbreviated parts of regular script "man'yōgana" as a glossing system to add readings or explanations to Buddhist sutras.
Kana is traditionally said to have been invented by the Buddhist priest Kūkai in the ninth century. Kūkai certainly brought the Siddhaṃ script of India home on his return from China in 806; his interest in the sacred aspects of speech and writing led him to the conclusion that Japanese would be better represented by a phonetic alphabet than by the kanji which had been used up to that point. The modern arrangement of kana reflects that of Siddhaṃ, but the traditional "iroha" arrangement follows a poem which uses each kana once.
The present set of kana was codified in 1900, and rules for their usage as per the "gendai kanazukai" spelling reforms of 1946.
Collation.
Kana are the basis for collation in Japanese. They are taken in the order given by the "gojūon" (あ い う え お ... わ を ん), though iroha (い ろ は に ほ へ と ... せ す (ん)) ordering is used for enumeration in some circumstances. Dictionaries differ in the sequence order for long/short vowel distinction, small "tsu" and diacritics. As Japanese does not use word spaces (except as a tool for children), there can be no word-by-word collation; all collation is kana-by-kana.
In Unicode.
The hiragana range in Unicode is U+3040 ... U+309F, and the katakana range is U+30A0 ... U+30FF. The obsolete and rare characters ("wi" and "we") also have their proper code points.
Characters U+3095 and U+3096 are hiragana small "ka" and small "ke", respectively. U+30F5 and U+30F6 are their katakana equivalents. Characters U+3099 and U+309A are combining dakuten and handakuten, which correspond to the spacing characters U+309B and U+309C. U+309D is the hiragana iteration mark, used to repeat a previous hiragana. U+309E is the voiced hiragana iteration mark, which stands in for the previous hiragana but with the consonant voiced ("k" becomes "g", "h" becomes "b", etc.). U+30FD and U+30FE are the katakana iteration marks. U+309F is a ligature of "yori" (より) sometimes used in vertical writing. U+30FF is a ligature of "koto" (コト), also found in vertical writing.
Additionally, there are halfwidth equivalents to the standard fullwidth katakana. These are encoded within the Halfwidth and Fullwidth Forms block (U+FF00–U+FFEF), starting at U+FF65 and ending at U+FF9F (characters U+FF61–U+FF64 are halfwidth punctuation marks):
There is also a small "Katakana Phonetic Extensions" range (U+31F0 ... U+31FF), which includes some additional small kana characters for writing the Ainu language. Further small kana characters are present in the "Small Kana Extension" block.
Unicode also includes "Katakana letter archaic E" (U+1B000), as well as 255 archaic Hiragana, in the Kana Supplement block. It also includes a further 31 archaic Hiragana in the Kana Extended-A block.

