
Kryptonite is a fictional material that appears primarily in Superman stories. In its best-known form, it is a green, crystalline material originating from Superman's home world of Krypton that emits a peculiar radiation that weakens Superman, but is generally harmless to humans when exposed to it in the short term but deadly in the long term. There are other varieties of kryptonite, such as red and gold kryptonite, which have different but still generally negative effects on Superman. Due to Superman's popularity, "kryptonite" has become a byword for an extraordinary exploitable weakness, synonymous with "Achilles' heel". Batman and Lex Luthor are two notable individuals who have pieces of kryptonite with them, with the former being trusted by Superman himself to stop the latter in case he goes rogue or does something out of the ordinary and the latter to ward off Superman's presence and at times incorporating it into weapons to try to kill him.
Origin.
An unpublished 1940 story titled "The K-Metal from Krypton", written by Superman creator Jerry Siegel, featured a prototype of kryptonite. It was a mineral from the planet Krypton that drained Superman of his strength while giving superhuman powers to mortals. This story was rejected because in it Superman reveals his identity to Lois Lane.
The mineral known as kryptonite was first officially introduced in the radio serial "The Adventures of Superman", in the story "The Meteor from Krypton", broadcast in June 1943. An apocryphal story claims that kryptonite was introduced to give Superman's voice actor, Bud Collyer, the possibility to take a vacation at a time when the radio serial was performed live. In an episode where Collyer would not be present to perform, Superman would be incapacitated by kryptonite, and a substitute voice actor would make groaning sounds. This tale was recounted by Julius Schwartz in his memoir. However, the historian Michael J. Hayde disputes this: in "The Meteor From Krypton", Superman is never exposed to kryptonite. If kryptonite allowed Collyer to take vacations, that was a fringe benefit discovered later. More likely, kryptonite was introduced as a plot device for Superman to discover his origin.
In the radio serial, Krypton was located in the same solar system as Earth, in the same orbit, but on the opposite side of the Sun. This provided an easy explanation for how kryptonite found its way to Earth.
Kryptonite was incorporated into the comic mythos with "Superman" #61 (November 1949). Editor Dorothy Woolfolk stated in an interview with "Florida Today" in August 1993 that she "felt Superman's invulnerability was boring."
The only substance in the universe that kryptonite radiation (from any variety) cannot penetrate is lead.
Forms, colors and effects.
Various forms of the fictional material have been created over the years in "Superman" publications and programs.
In other media.
Serials.
Columbia Pictures produced two 15-part motion picture serials that used kryptonite as a plot device: "Superman" (1948) and "Atom Man vs. Superman" (1950).
Music.
Songs:

