
Leonard H. "Bones" McCoy is a character in the American science-fiction franchise "Star Trek". McCoy was originally played by actor DeForest Kelley in the from 1966 to 1969, and he also appears in the , six "Star Trek" movies, the pilot episode of "", and in numerous books, comics, and video games. After Kelley's death, "The Lord of the Rings" star Karl Urban assumed the role of McCoy in the "Star Trek" reboot film in 2009.
Depiction.
McCoy was born in Atlanta, Georgia, in 2227. The son of David McCoy, he attended the University of Mississippi and is a divorcé. McCoy later married Natira, the priestess of Yonada, characterized in the episode, "For the World Is Hollow and I Have Touched the Sky". In 2266, McCoy was posted as chief medical officer of the USS "Enterprise" under Captain James T. Kirk, who often calls him "Bones". McCoy and Kirk are good friends, even "brotherly". The passionate, sometimes cantankerous McCoy frequently argues with Kirk's other confidant, science officer Spock, and occasionally is prejudiced against Spock's Vulcan heritage. McCoy often plays the role of Kirk's conscience, offering a counterpoint to Spock's logic. McCoy is suspicious of technology, especially the transporter. As a physician, he prefers less intrusive treatment and believes in the body's innate recuperative powers. The character's nickname, "Bones", is a play on "sawbones", an epithet for a physician qualified as a surgeon. In the 2009 "Star Trek" film reboot, when McCoy first meets Kirk, he states, "The ex-wife took the whole damn planet in the divorce. All I got left is my bones", which also could be from where his nickname came.
When Kirk orders McCoy's commission reactivated in ' (1979); a resentful McCoy complains of being "drafted". Spock transfers his "katra"—his knowledge and experience—into McCoy before dying in ' (1982). This causes mental anguish for McCoy, who in ' (1984) helps restore Spock's "katra" to his reanimated body. McCoy continues to serve on Kirk's crew aboard the captured Klingon ship in ' (1986). In "" (1989), McCoy (through the intervention of Spock's half-brother Sybok) reveals that he helped his father commit suicide to relieve him of his pain. Shortly after the suicide, a cure was found for his father's disease, and McCoy had carried the guilt about it with him until Sybok's intervention.
In ' (1991), McCoy and Kirk escape from a Klingon prison world, and the "Enterprise" crew stops a plot to prevent peace between the United Federation of Planets and the Klingon Empire. Kelley reprised the role for the "Encounter at Farpoint" pilot episode of ' (1987), insisting upon no more than the minimum Screen Actors Guild payment for his appearance. McCoy had attained the rank of admiral in the Trek timeline when this episode was aired, and he is stated to be 137 years of age. He went on to become chief of Starfleet Medical, with a special rank known as branch admiral. The fictional book "Comparative Alien Physiology" was written by McCoy, and was required reading at the Starfleet Medical Academy through the 2370s. 
In the 1973 " episode ", McCoy mentions he has a daughter, Joanna. Although Chekov's friend Irina in the original series episode "The Way to Eden" was originally written as McCoy's daughter, it was changed before the episode was shot.
Reboot film series.
In the 2009 "Star Trek" film, which takes place in an alternate, parallel reality, McCoy and Kirk become friends at Starfleet Academy, which McCoy joins after a divorce that he says, "left [him] nothing but [his] bones." This line, improvised by Urban, explains how McCoy earned the nickname "Bones". McCoy later helps get Kirk posted aboard the USS "Enterprise". He later becomes the chief medical officer after Doctor Puri is killed during an attack by Nero. McCoy remains aboard to see the "Enterprise" defeat Nero and his crew, with Kirk becoming the commanding officer of the ship.
"The Guardian" called Urban's portrayal of McCoy in the 2009 film an "unqualified success", and "The New York Times" called the character "wild-eyed and funny". "Slate" said Urban came closer than the other actors to impersonating a character's original depiction.
Development.
Kelley had worked with "Star Trek" creator Gene Roddenberry on previous television pilots, and he was Roddenberry's first choice to play the doctor aboard the USS "Enterprise". However, for the rejected pilot "" (1964), Roddenberry went with director Robert Butler's choice of John Hoyt to play Dr. Philip Boyce. For the second pilot, "Where No Man Has Gone Before" (1966), Roddenberry accepted director James Goldstone's decision to have Paul Fix play Dr. Mark Piper. Although Roddenberry wanted Kelley to play the character of ship's doctor, he did not put Kelley's name forward to NBC; the network never "rejected" the actor, as Roddenberry sometimes suggested.
Kelley's first broadcast appearance as Doctor Leonard McCoy was in "The Man Trap" (1966). Despite his character's prominence, Kelley's contract granted him only a "featuring" credit; he was not given "starring" credit until the second season, at the urging of producer Robert Justman. Kelley was apprehensive about "Star Trek"s future, telling Roddenberry that the show was "going to be the biggest hit or the biggest miss God ever made". Kelley portrayed McCoy throughout the original "Star Trek" series, and voiced the character in the animated "Star Trek".
Kelley, who in his youth wanted to become a doctor like his uncle, but whose family could not pay for a medical education, in part drew upon his real-life experiences in creating McCoy, a doctor's "matter-of-fact" delivery of news of Kelley's mother's terminal cancer was the "abrasive sand" Kelley used in creating McCoy's demeanor. "Star Trek" writer D. C. Fontana said that while Roddenberry created the series, Kelley essentially created McCoy; everything done with the character was done with Kelley's input.
"Exquisite chemistry" among Kelley, William Shatner, and Leonard Nimoy manifested itself in their performances as McCoy, Captain James T. Kirk, and Science Officer Spock, respectively. Nichelle Nichols, who played Uhura, referred to Kelley as her "sassy gentleman friend"; the friendship between the African-American Nichols and Southern Kelley was a real-life demonstration of the message Roddenberry hoped to convey through "Star Trek".
For the 2009 "Star Trek" film, writers Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman saw McCoy as an "arbiter" in Kirk and Spock's relationship. While Spock represented "extreme logic, extreme science" and Kirk symbolized "extreme emotion and intuition", McCoy's role as "a very colorful doctor, essentially a very humanistic scientist", represented the "two extremes that often served as the glue that held the trio together". They chose to reveal that McCoy befriended Kirk first, explaining the "bias" in their friendship and why he would often be a "little dismissive" of Spock. Urban said the script was "very faithful" to the original character, including the "great compassion for humanity and that sense of irascibility" with which Kelley imbued the character. New Zealand-born Urban trained with a dialect coach to create McCoy's accent and reprised the role in its sequels "Star Trek Into Darkness" and "Star Trek Beyond".
Cultural impact.
McCoy is someone to whom Kirk unburdens himself, but is a foil to Spock. He is Kirk's "friend, personal bartender, confidant, counselor, and priest". Spock and McCoy's bickering became so popular that Roddenberry wrote in a 1968 memo "we simply didn't realize ... how much the fans loved the bickering between our Arrowsmith and our Alien". Urban said McCoy has a "sense of irascibility with real passion for life and doing the right thing", and that "Spock's logic and McCoy's moral standing gave Kirk the benefit of having three brains instead of just one."
Kelley said that his greatest thrill at "Star Trek" conventions was the number of people who told him they entered the medical profession because of the McCoy character. He received two or three letters a month from others reporting similar experiences. A friend observed that despite not becoming a doctor as he had hoped, Kelley's portrayal of McCoy had helped create many doctors. According to Kelley, "You can win awards and that sort of thing, but to influence the youth of the country ... is an award that is not handed out by the industry".
"He's dead, Jim!".
Twenty times on the original "Star Trek", McCoy declares someone or something deceased with the line, "He's dead", "He's dead, Jim", or something similar. The phrase so became a catchphrase of the character that Kelley joked that the line would appear on his tombstone—and it appeared in the first sentence of at least one obituary—but disliked repeating such lines and refused to say it in "" when Spock is near death, since the levity brought by the catchphrase seemed in poor taste for the gravitas of the moment. Kelley and James Doohan (Scotty) agreed to swap their lines, so McCoy warns Kirk against opening the engineering doors while Scotty says, "He's dead already".
University of Southern California literature professor Henry Jenkins cites Dr. McCoy's "He's dead, Jim" line as an example of fans actively participating in the creation of an underground culture in which they derive pleasure by repeating memorable lines as part of constructing new mythologies and alternative social communities.
"I'm a doctor, not a(n)...".
Another of McCoy's catchphrases is his "I'm a doctor, (Jim) not a(n)..." statements, delivered by Kelley 11 times, and three times by Karl Urban in later films. McCoy repeats the line when he must perform some task beyond his medical skills, such as the "classic moment" when he is confronted with the unusual silicon-based Horta alien in "The Devil in the Dark" (1967), saying, "I'm a doctor, not a bricklayer."
Kelley himself parodied the phrase in a brief 1992 commercial for Trivial Pursuit's 10th Anniversary Edition, in which the question is asked, "How many chambers are there in a human heart?" Kelley appears on screen and replies "How should I know? I'm an actor, not a doctor!".
Reception.
In a rebuttal to a tongue-in-cheek analysis in the "Canadian Medical Association Journal", which claimed that Dr. Nick from "The Simpsons" was a better role model than his competitor Dr. Hibbert, both of which were published in the same journal in 1998, both doctors are cast aside for Dr. McCoy, "TV's only true physician" and "someone who has broken free from the yoke of ethics and practises the art and science of medicine beyond the stultifying opposition of paternalism and autonomy. A free and independent thinker and, indeed, someone even beyond role models".
In 2012, IGN ranked the character Doctor McCoy, as depicted in the original series, its films, and the 2009 film "Star Trek," as the fifth-top character of the "Star Trek" universe, behind Data, Picard, Spock, and Kirk.
In 2016, Doctor McCoy was ranked as the fifth-most important character of Starfleet within the "Star Trek" science-fiction universe by "Wired".
In 2016, SyFy ranked McCoy third of the six main-cast space doctors of the "Star Trek" franchise.
In 2017, Screen Rant ranked the reboot film (Kelvin timeline) McCoy, played by Urban, as the 17th-most attractive person in the "Star Trek" universe.
In 2018, "The Wrap" placed Doctor McCoy as sixth out 39 in a ranking of main cast characters of the "Star Trek" franchise. In 2018, CBR ranked McCoy as the 11th-best Starfleet character of "Star Trek."

