
This list of wine-producing regions catalogues significant growing regions where vineyards are planted. Wine grapes mostly grow between the 30th and the 50th degree of latitude, in both the Northern and Southern hemispheres. Grapes will sometimes grow beyond this range, thus minor amounts of wine are made in some rather unexpected places.
In 2014, the five largest producers of wine in the world were, in order, Italy, Spain, France, the United States, and China.
Countries.
The following is a list of the top wine-producing countries and their volume of wine production for the year 2014 in tonnes, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), which is an agency of the United Nations; this is the latest information available from the FAO.
Their data show a total worldwide production of 31 million tonnes of wine with the top 15 producing countries accounting for over 90% of the total.
Europe.
Romania.
Banat wine regions:
Crişana wine regions:
Dobrogea wine regions:
Moldavia wine regions:
Muntenia wine regions:
Oltenia wine regions:
Transylvania wine regions:
Ukraine.
In Ukraine, at the present time there are seven administrative regions (provinces) in which the wine industry has developed. Given the favorable climatic location, the law of Ukraine allocated 15 winegrowing areas (macrozones), which are the basis for growing certain varieties of grapes, and 58 natural wine regions (microzones). These are located mainly in the following areas.
United Kingdom.
In the UK, the area under vines is small, and whilst viticulture is not a major part of the rural economy, significant planting of new vines has occurred in the early 21st century. The greatest concentration of vineyards is found in the south east of England, in the counties of Hampshire, Kent, Surrey, and Sussex.
Asia.
China.
Regions producing native wines have been present since the Qin Dynasty, with wines being brought to China from Persia. Some of the more famous wine-producing regions are:
With the import of Western wine-making technologies, especially French technology, production of wines similar to modern French wine has begun in many parts of China with the direction of experienced French wine-makers; China is now the sixth largest producer of wine in the world. The following regions produce significant quality of wine:
Indonesia.
Indonesia has been producing wine for over 18 years, with North Bali's vineyards producing three main grape varieties: the Belgia, the Alphonse Lavallee and the Probolinggo Biru. The main producer, Hatten Wines, has revolutionized the world of winemaking, with eight wines produced from these three varieties.
Iran.
Prior to the Iranian Islamic Revolution of 1979, Iran was a producer of wine. While production has stopped, the vineyards continue to exist and their product has been diverted to non-alcoholic purposes.
Israel.
"Also includes wine regions in Israeli-occupied territories."
Oceania.
Australia.
Geographic indications for Australian wine are governed by law. The geographic indication must indicate where the "grapes" are grown, irrespective of where the wine itself is made. A geographic indication may be "Australia", "South Eastern Australia", a state name, zone, region or subregion if defined.
The zones, regions and subregions in each state are listed below:
South Australia.
"Adelaide Super Zone includes Mount Lofty Ranges, Fleurieu and Barossa wine zones".
New Zealand.
GI stands for New Zealand Geographical Indication.

