
New Zealand consists of many islands, estimated around six hundred, mainly remnants of a larger land mass now beneath the sea. The following is a list of islands of New Zealand.
Each of the two larger main islands – where most of the population lives – has two official names, in English and in the Māori language. They are the North Island or "Te Ika-a-Māui", and the South Island or "Te Waipounamu". Various Māori iwi sometimes use different names, with some preferring to call the South Island "Te Waka o Aoraki". The islands are separated by Cook Strait. The South Island is sometimes informally referred to as the "mainland", especially by its residents, because it is somewhat larger, albeit with a smaller population. However, in general practice, the "mainland" refers to the North Island and South Island collectively, in contrast with the smaller offshore islands.
Stewart Island or "Rakiura", in the south, is the largest of the smaller islands, although Waiheke Island in the urban Auckland Region has the largest population of the smaller islands.
Listed by size.
The following table lists the largest islands of New Zealand by size. (The associated Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau, and islands of the Antarctic Ross Dependency are excluded.) River delta islands such as Rakaia Island (), Fereday Island, Rangitata Island, and Inch Clutha (approximately , , and respectively) are also omitted, as are temporary islands in braided river channels and tidal islands such as Rabbit Island, Nelson (). The country's largest island within a lake, Pomona Island, has an area of just .
Listed by highest point.
The following table lists the islands of New Zealand by their highest elevation. These islands are all in harbours or the open sea. The country's tallest island within a lake, Pomona Island, rises to above sea level, which is about above Lake Manapouri's normal lake level.
Outlying.
New Zealand administers the following islands outside the main archipelago. Only the Chatham Islands have a permanent population although others also did in the past. Others host visitors for science, conservation, meteorological observation and tourism.
The New Zealand Subantarctic Islands are designated as a World Heritage Site.
Realm of New Zealand.
The following islands are part of the Realm of New Zealand, but are not part of New Zealand proper:
Territorial claims.
New Zealand also claims the Ross Dependency in Antarctica, including:

