
The following is a list of the highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada, a market known in the film industry as the "North American box office" and the "domestic box office", and where "gross" is defined in US dollars.
Not adjusted for inflation.
This is a list of the highest-grossing films in the U.S. and Canada, a market known in the film industry as the North American box office, or as the domestic box office within the U.S. itself. The chart is ranked by lifetime gross, and for comparison, the figures adjusted for the effects of inflation are also listed, using the U.S. consumer price index; a film's earnings from its initial release are also included to provide a basis for comparison between films released around the same time.
 These films fall outside the top 100 when considering only initial gross, and would be replaced by "Home Alone" ($285.76m), "" ($281.72m), and "The Matrix Reloaded" ($281.57m).
Adjusted for ticket-price inflation.
This chart ranks films by gross adjusted for ticket price inflation to 2019 levels, based on data from Box Office Mojo. It was compiled by multiplying the average ticket price in the current year by an estimate of the total number of admissions. Where the number of admissions in unknown, they are estimated by dividing the nominal gross by the average ticket price in the year of release to provide an estimate (taking re-releases into account). Admissions better reflect the popularity of older films, since they are less susceptible to the effects of inflation.
Many of the films on this list were released prior to the availability of home video and have had multiple releases.
Factors in determining "adjusted gross".
No one yet has calculated a truly precise and definite referential adjusted gross for a film, since doing so would have to take into account most (or all) of the following:
Further explanation of issues with calculating an adjusted gross can be found in the article for List of highest-grossing films.
Franchises and film series not adjusted for inflation.
This is a list of highest-grossing franchises and film series in the U.S. and Canada.
Franchises and film series adjusted for inflation.
This chart was compiled based on data from Box Office Mojo, by dividing the gross by the average ticket price to calculate an estimate of the total number of admissions.

