
A municipality is usually a single administrative division having corporate status and powers of self-government or jurisdiction as granted by national and regional laws to which it is subordinate.
The term "municipality" may also mean the governing or ruling body of a given municipality. A municipality is a general-purpose administrative subdivision, as opposed to a special-purpose district.
The term is derived from French "municipalité" and Latin "municipalis". The English word "municipality" derives from the Latin social contract "municipium" (derived from a word meaning "duty holders"), referring to the Latin communities that supplied Rome with troops in exchange for their own incorporation into the Roman state (granting Roman citizenship to the inhabitants) while permitting the communities to retain their own local governments (a limited autonomy).
A municipality can be any political jurisdiction from a sovereign state, such as the Principality of Monaco, to a small village, such as West Hampton Dunes, New York.
The territory over which a municipality has jurisdiction may encompass
Political powers.
Powers of municipalities range from virtual autonomy to complete subordination to the state. Municipalities may have the right to tax individuals and corporations with income tax, property tax, and corporate income tax, but may also receive substantial funding from the state. In some European countries, such as Germany, municipalities have the constitutional right to supply public services through municipally-owned public utility companies.
Terms in various countries.
Municipality.
Terms cognate with "municipality", mostly referring to territory or political structure, are Spanish ' (Spain) and ' (Chile), and Catalan "".
Communes.
In a number of countries terms cognate with "commune" are used, referring to the community living in the area and the common interest. These include terms:
The same terms may be used for church congregations or parishes, for example in the German and Dutch Protestant churches.
Other terms.
In Greece, the word Δήμος (demos) is used, also meaning 'community'; the word is known in English from the compound "democracy" (rule of the people).
In some countries, the Spanish term "", referring to a municipality's administration building, is extended via synecdoche to denote the municipality itself. In Moldova and Romania, both "municipalities" ("municipiu"; urban administrative units) and "communes" ("comună"; rural units) exist, and a commune may be part of a municipality.
In many countries, comparable entities may exist with various names.

