
, better known by his pen name , is a Japanese manga artist. Shirow is best known for the manga "Ghost in the Shell", which has since been turned into three theatrical anime movies, two anime television series, an anime television movie, an anime OVA series, a theatrical live action movie, and several video games.
Life and career.
Born in the Hyōgo Prefecture capital city of Kobe, he studied oil painting at Osaka University of Arts. While in college, he developed an interest in manga, which led him to create his own complete work, "Black Magic", which was published in the manga dōjinshi "Atlas". His work caught the eye of Seishinsha President Harumichi Aoki, who offered to publish him.
The result was best-selling manga "Appleseed", a full volume of densely plotted drama taking place in an ambiguous future. The story was a sensation, and won the 1986 Seiun Award for Best Manga. After a professional reprint of "Black Magic" and a second volume of "Appleseed", he released "Dominion" in 1986. Two more volumes of "Appleseed" followed before he began work on "Ghost in the Shell".
In 2007, he collaborated again with Production I.G to co-create the original concept for the anime television series "Ghost Hound", Production I.G's 20th anniversary project. A further original collaboration with Production I.G began airing in April 2008, titled "Real Drive".
Bibliography.
Art books.
A substantial amount of Shirow's work has been released in art book or poster book format. The following is an incomplete list.
Galgrease.
"Galgrease" (published in "Uppers Magazine", 2002) is the collected name of several erotic manga and poster books by Shirow. The name comes from the fact that the women depicted often look "greased".
The first series of "Galgrease" booklets included four issues each in the following settings:
The second series included another run of 12 booklets in the following worlds:
After each regular series, there were one or more bonus poster books that revisited the existing characters and settings.

