
In number theory, a multiplicative function is an arithmetic function "f"("n") of a positive integer "n" with the property that "f"(1) = 1 and whenever
"a" and "b" are coprime, then
An arithmetic function "f"("n") is said to be completely multiplicative (or totally multiplicative) if "f"(1) = 1 and "f"("ab") = "f"("a")"f"("b") holds "for all" positive integers "a" and "b", even when they are not coprime.
Examples.
Some multiplicative functions are defined to make formulas easier to write:
Other examples of multiplicative functions include many functions of importance in number theory, such as:
An example of a non-multiplicative function is the arithmetic function "r""2"("n") - the number of representations of "n" as a sum of squares of two integers, positive, negative, or zero, where in counting the number of ways, reversal of order is allowed. For example:
and therefore "r"2(1) = 4 ≠ 1. This shows that the function is not multiplicative. However, "r"2("n")/4 is multiplicative.
In the On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences, sequences of values of a multiplicative function have the keyword "mult".
See arithmetic function for some other examples of non-multiplicative functions.
Properties.
A multiplicative function is completely determined by its values at the powers of prime numbers, a consequence of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. Thus, if "n" is a product of powers of distinct primes, say "n" = "p""a" "q""b" ..., then 
"f"("n") = "f"("p""a") "f"("q""b") ...
This property of multiplicative functions significantly reduces the need for computation, as in the following examples for "n" = 144 = 24 · 32:
Similarly, we have:
In general, if "f"("n") is a multiplicative function and "a", "b" are any two positive integers, then
Every completely multiplicative function is a homomorphism of monoids and is completely determined by its restriction to the prime numbers.
Convolution.
If "f" and "g" are two multiplicative functions, one defines a new multiplicative function "f" * "g", the "Dirichlet convolution" of "f" and "g", by
where the sum extends over all positive divisors "d" of "n". 
With this operation, the set of all multiplicative functions turns into an abelian group; the identity element is "ε". Convolution is commutative, associative, and distributive over addition.
Relations among the multiplicative functions discussed above include:
The Dirichlet convolution can be defined for general arithmetic functions, and yields a ring structure, the Dirichlet ring. 
The Dirichlet convolution of two multiplicative functions is again multiplicative. A proof of this fact is given by the following expansion for relatively prime formula_11: 
Dirichlet series for some multiplicative functions.
More examples are shown in the article on Dirichlet series.
Multiplicative function over.
Let "A" = , the polynomial ring over the finite field with "q" elements. "A" is a principal ideal domain and therefore "A" is a unique factorization domain.
A complex-valued function formula_17 on "A" is called multiplicative if formula_18 whenever "f" and "g" are relatively prime.
Zeta function and Dirichlet series in.
Let "h" be a polynomial arithmetic function (i.e. a function on set of monic polynomials over "A"). Its corresponding Dirichlet series is defined to be
where for formula_20 set formula_21 if formula_22 and formula_23 otherwise.
The polynomial zeta function is then
Similar to the situation in , every Dirichlet series of a multiplicative function "h" has a product representation (Euler product):
where the product runs over all monic irreducible polynomials "P". For example, the product representation of the zeta function is as for the integers:
Unlike the classical zeta function, formula_27 is a simple rational function:
In a similar way, If "f" and "g" are two polynomial arithmetic functions, one defines "f" * "g", the "Dirichlet convolution" of "f" and "g", by
where the sum is over all monic divisors "d" of "m", or equivalently over all pairs ("a", "b") of monic polynomials whose product is "m". The identity formula_30 still holds.

