
Marjoram (; Origanum majorana) is a cold-sensitive perennial herb or undershrub with sweet pine and citrus flavours. In some Middle Eastern countries, marjoram is synonymous with oregano, and there the names sweet marjoram and knotted marjoram are used to distinguish it from other plants of the genus "Origanum". It is also called pot marjoram, although this name is also used for other cultivated species of "Origanum".
History.
Marjoram is indigenous to Cyprus, Turkey, the Mediterranean, Western Asia, the Arabian Peninsula, and the Levant, and was known to the ancient Greeks and Romans as a symbol of happiness. It may have spread to the British Isles during the Middle Ages. Marjoram was not widely used in the United States until after World War II.
The name marjoram (Old French: "majorane"; ) does not directly derive from the Latin word (major).
Description.
Leaves are smooth, simple, petiolated, ovate to oblong-ovate, long, wide, with obtuse apex, entire margin, symmetrical but tapering base, and reticulate venation. The texture of the leaf is extremely smooth due to the presence of numerous hairs.
Cultivation.
Considered a tender perennial (USDA Zones 7–9), marjoram can sometimes prove hardy even in zone 5.
Marjoram is cultivated for its aromatic leaves, either green or dry, for culinary purposes; the tops are cut as the plants begin to flower and are dried slowly in the shade. It is often used in herb combinations such as "herbes de Provence" and "za'atar". The flowering leaves and tops of marjoram are steam-distilled to produce an essential oil that is yellowish in color (darkening to brown as it ages). It has many chemical components, some of which are borneol, camphor, and pinene.
Related species.
Oregano ("Origanum vulgare"), sometimes listed with marjoram as "O. majorana", is also called wild marjoram. It is a perennial common in southern Europe and north to Sweden in dry copses and on hedge-banks, with many stout stems high, bearing short-stalked, somewhat ovate leaves and clusters of purple flowers. It has a stronger flavor than marjoram.
Pot marjoram or Cretan oregano ("O. onites") has similar uses to marjoram.
Hardy marjoram or French/Italian/Sicilian marjoram ("O. × majoricum"), a cross of marjoram with oregano, is much more resistant to cold, but is slightly less sweet.
"O. × pulchellum" is known as showy marjoram or showy oregano.
Uses.
Marjoram is used for seasoning soups, stews, salad dressings, sauces, and herbal teas.

