
Magnolia is a large genus of about 210 flowering plant species in the subfamily Magnolioideae of the family Magnoliaceae. It is named after French botanist Pierre Magnol.
"Magnolia" is an ancient genus. Appearing before bees evolved, the flowers are theorized to have evolved to encourage pollination by beetles. To avoid damage from pollinating beetles, the carpels of "Magnolia" flowers are extremely tough. Fossilized specimens of "M. acuminata" have been found dating to 20 million years ago, and of plants identifiably belonging to the Magnoliaceae date to 95 million years ago. Another aspect of "Magnolia" considered to represent an ancestral state is that the flower bud is enclosed in a bract rather than in sepals; the perianth parts are undifferentiated and called tepals rather than distinct sepals and petals. "Magnolia" shares the tepal characteristic with several other flowering plants near the base of the flowering plant lineage such as "Amborella" and "Nymphaea" (as well as with many more recently derived plants such as "Lilium").
The natural range of "Magnolia" species is a disjunct distribution, with a main center in east and southeast Asia and a secondary center in eastern North America, Central America, the West Indies, and some species in South America.
Description.
Magnolias are spreading, evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs, characterised by large fragrant flowers which may be bowl-shaped or star-shaped, in shades of white, pink, purple, green or yellow. In deciduous species the blooms often appear before the leaves, in Spring. Cone-like fruits are often produced in Autumn.
As with all Magnoliaceae, the perianth is undifferentiated, with 9–15 tepals in 3 or more whorls. The flowers are bisexual with numerous adnate carpels and stamens are arranged in a spiral fashion on the elongated receptacle. The fruit dehisces along the dorsal sutures of the carpels. The pollen is monocolpate, and the embryo development is of the Polygonum type.
Etymology.
Charles Plumier (1646–1704) described a flowering tree from the island of Martinique in his "Genera", giving it the name "Magnolia", after the French botanist Pierre Magnol.
Uses.
Horticultural uses.
In general, the genus "Magnolia" has attracted horticultural interest. Some, such as the shrub "M. stellata" (star magnolia) and the tree "M." × "soulangeana" (saucer magnolia) flower quite early in the spring, before the leaves open. Others flower in late spring or early summer, including "M. virginiana" (sweetbay magnolia) and "M. grandiflora" (southern magnolia).
Hybridisation has been immensely successful in combining the best aspects of different species to give plants which flower at an earlier age than the parent species, as well as having more impressive flowers. One of the most popular garden magnolias, "M". × "soulangeana", is a hybrid of "M. liliiflora" and "M. denudata".
In the eastern United States, five native species are frequently in cultivation: "M. acuminata" (as a shade tree), "M. grandiflora", "M. virginiana", "M. tripetala", and "M. macrophylla". The last two species must be planted where high winds are not a frequent problem because of the large size of their leaves.
Culinary uses.
The flowers of many species are considered edible. In parts of England, the petals of "M. grandiflora" are pickled and used as a spicy condiment. In some Asian cuisines, the buds are pickled and used to flavor rice and scent tea. In Japan, the young leaves and flower buds of "Magnolia hypoleuca" are broiled and eaten as a vegetable. Older leaves are made into a powder and used as seasoning; dried, whole leaves are placed on a charcoal brazier and filled with miso, leeks, daikon, and shiitake, and broiled. There is a type of miso which is seasoned with magnolia, hoba miso.
In parts of Japan, the leaves of "M. obovata" are used for wrapping food and cooking dishes.
Traditional medicine.
The bark and flower buds of "M. officinalis" have long been used in traditional Chinese medicine, where they are known as "hou po" (厚朴). In Japan, "kōboku", "M. obovata", has been used in a similar manner.
Timber.
The cucumbertree, "M. acuminata", grows to large size and is harvested as a timber tree in northeastern US forests. Its wood is sold as "yellow poplar" along with that of the tuliptree, "Liriodendron tulipifera". The Fraser magnolia, "M. fraseri", also attains enough size sometimes to be harvested, as well.
Other uses.
Magnolias are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, including the giant leopard moth.
Chemical compounds and bioeffects.
The aromatic bark contains magnolol, honokiol, 4-O-methylhonokiol, and obovatol. Magnolol and honokiol activate the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma.
Culture.
Arts.
Literature.
Despite Meeropol's frequent mention of the South and magnolia trees, the horrific image which inspired his poem, Lawrence Beitler's 1930 photograph capturing the lynching of Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith following the robbery and murder of Claude Deteer, actually occurred in Marion, Indiana, where magnolia trees are less common.
Visual arts.
The Canadian artist, Sarah Maloney, has created a series of sculptures of magnolia flowers in bronze and steel, entitled "First Flowers", in which she draws our attention to the dual symbols of beginnings in the flower, as both an evolutionary archetype and also one of the first trees to flower in spring (see illustration).
Taxonomy.
History.
Early.
The name "Magnolia" first appeared in 1703 in the "Genera" of Charles Plumier (1646–1704), for a flowering tree from the island of Martinique ("talauma"). English botanist William Sherard, who studied botany in Paris under Joseph Pitton de Tournefort, a pupil of Magnol, was most probably the first after Plumier to adopt the genus name "Magnolia". He was at least responsible for the taxonomic part of Johann Jacob Dillenius's "Hortus Elthamensis" and of Mark Catesby's "Natural History of Carolina, Florida and the Bahama Islands". These were the first works after Plumier's "Genera" that used the name "Magnolia", this time for some species of flowering trees from temperate North America. The species that Plumier originally named "Magnolia" was later described as "Annona dodecapetala" by Lamarck, and has since been named "Magnolia plumieri" and "Talauma plumieri" (and still a number of other names) but is now known as "Magnolia dodecapetala".
Carl Linnaeus, who was familiar with Plumier's "Genera", adopted the genus name "Magnolia" in 1735 in his first edition of "Systema Naturae", without a description, but with a reference to Plumier's work. In 1753, he took up Plumier's "Magnolia" in the first edition of "Species Plantarum". There he described a monotypic genus, with the sole species being "Magnolia virginiana". Since Linnaeus never saw a herbarium specimen (if there ever was one) of Plumier's "Magnolia" and had only his description and a rather poor picture at hand, he must have taken it for the same plant which was described by Catesby in his 1730 "Natural History of Carolina". He placed it in the synonymy of "Magnolia virginiana" var. "fœtida", the taxon now known as "Magnolia grandiflora". Under "Magnolia virginiana" Linnaeus described five varieties ("glauca", "fœtida", "grisea", "tripetala", and "acuminata"). In the tenth edition of "Systema Naturae" (1759), he merged "grisea" with "glauca", and raised the four remaining varieties to species status.
By the end of the 18th century, botanists and plant hunters exploring Asia began to name and describe the "Magnolia" species from China and Japan. The first Asiatic species to be described by western botanists were "Magnolia denudata", "Magnolia liliiflora", "Magnolia coco" and "Magnolia figo". Soon after that, in 1794, Carl Peter Thunberg collected and described "Magnolia obovata" from Japan and at roughly the same time "Magnolia kobus" was also first collected.
Recent.
With the number of species increasing, the genus was divided into the two subgenera "Magnolia" and "Yulania". "Magnolia" contains the American evergreen species "M. grandiflora", which is of horticultural importance, especially in the southeastern United States, and "M. virginiana", the type species. "Yulania" contains several deciduous Asiatic species, such as "M. denudata" and "M. kobus", which have become horticulturally important in their own right and as parents in hybrids. Classified in "Yulania", is also the American deciduous "M. acuminata" (cucumber tree), which has recently attained greater status as the parent responsible for the yellow flower color in many new hybrids.
Relations in the family Magnoliaceae have been puzzling taxonomists for a long time. Because the family is quite old and has survived many geological events (such as ice ages, mountain formation, and continental drift), its distribution has become scattered. Some species or groups of species have been isolated for a long time, while others could stay in close contact. To create divisions in the family (or even within the genus "Magnolia"), solely based upon morphological characters, has proven to be a nearly impossible task.
By the end of the 20th century, DNA sequencing had become available as a method of large-scale research on phylogenetic relationships. Several studies, including studies on many species in the family Magnoliaceae, were carried out to investigate relationships. What these studies all revealed was that genus "Michelia" and "Magnolia" subgenus "Yulania" were far more closely allied to each other than either one of them was to "Magnolia" subgenus "Magnolia". These phylogenetic studies were supported by morphological data.
As nomenclature is supposed to reflect relationships, the situation with the species names in "Michelia" and "Magnolia" subgenus "Yulania" was undesirable. Taxonomically, three choices are available: 1 to join "Michelia" and "Yulania" species in a common genus, not being "Magnolia" (for which the name "Michelia" has priority), 2 to raise subgenus "Yulania" to generic rank, leaving "Michelia" names and subgenus "Magnolia" names untouched, or 3 to join "Michelia" with genus "Magnolia" into genus "Magnolia" s.l. (a big genus). "Magnolia" subgenus "Magnolia" cannot be renamed because it contains "M. virginiana", the type species of the genus and of the family.
Not many "Michelia" species have so far become horticulturally or economically important, apart for their wood. Both subgenus "Magnolia" and subgenus "Yulania" include species of major horticultural importance, and a change of name would be very undesirable for many people, especially in the horticultural branch. In Europe, "Magnolia" even is more or less a synonym for "Yulania", since most of the cultivated species on this continent have "Magnolia (Yulania) denudata" as one of their parents. Most taxonomists who acknowledge close relations between "Yulania" and "Michelia" therefore support the third option and join "Michelia" with "Magnolia".
The same goes, "mutatis mutandis", for the (former) genera "Talauma" and "Dugandiodendron", which are then placed in subgenus "Magnolia", and genus "Manglietia", which could be joined with subgenus "Magnolia" or may even earn the status of an extra subgenus. "Elmerrillia" seems to be closely related to "Michelia" and "Yulania", in which case it will most likely be treated in the same way as "Michelia" is now. The precise nomenclatural status of small or monospecific genera like "Kmeria", "Parakmeria", "Pachylarnax", "Manglietiastrum", "Aromadendron", "Woonyoungia", "Alcimandra", "Paramichelia" and "Tsoongiodendron" remains uncertain. Taxonomists who merge "Michelia" into "Magnolia" tend to merge these small genera into "Magnolia" s.l. as well. Botanists do not yet agree on whether to recognize a big "Magnolia" or the different small genera. For example, "Flora of China" offers two choices: a large genus "Magnolia" which includes about 300 species, everything in the Magnoliaceae except "Liriodendron" (tulip tree), or 16 different genera, some of them recently split out or re-recognized, each of which contains up to 50 species. The western co-author favors the big genus "Magnolia", whereas the Chinese recognize the different small genera.
Subdivision.
Species of magnolia are most commonly listed under three subgenera, 12 sections, and 13 subsections, such as that used here, following the classification of the Magnolia Society. It does not represent the last word on the subclassification of the genus "Magnolia" (see above), as a clear consensus has not yet been reached. Each species entry follows this pattern: "Botanical name" – 
The subdivision structure is as follows:
Subgenus "Magnolia".
Anthers open by splitting at the front facing the centre of the flower, deciduous or evergreen, flowers produced after the leaves.
Subgenus "Yulania".
Anthers open by splitting at the sides, deciduous, flowers mostly produced before leaves (except "M. acuminata")
Subgenus "Gynopodium".
Section "Manglietiastrum".
&lt;/small&gt;

