
The Mozambique Channel (, , ) is an arm of the Indian Ocean located between the Southeast African countries of Madagascar and Mozambique. The channel is about long and across at its narrowest point, and reaches a depth of about off the coast of Mozambique. A warm current, the Mozambique Current, flows in a southward direction in the channel, leading into the Agulhas Current off the east coast of South Africa.
Extent.
The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) defines the limits of the Mozambique Channel as follows:
Despite being defined as the South African coast by the IHO, the western limit of the channel is more correctly defined as the coast of Southern Africa or, more specifically, of Mozambique.
History.
World War II.
"Graf Spee" Incident.
On 15 November 1939, under the command of Captain Patrick (Paddy) Dove, the British Coastal Tanker "Africa Shell" was plying through the Mozambique Channel en-passage from Quelimane to Lourenco Marques sailing in ballast. During the course of the morning, at a point south-southwest from the lighthouse at Cape Zavora, she was spotted by the German Pocket Battleship "Admiral Graf Spee", under the command of Captain Hans Langsdorff, and which was embarked upon a commerce raiding sortie. "Graf Spee" ordered the "Africa Shell" to stop by the firing of a shot across her bow.
Having stopped the "Africa Shell," a cutter with a boarding party was despatched from the "Graf Spee" and subsequently boarded the tanker, the officer in charge addressing Captain Dove in perfect English with the sentence: "Good morning, captain. Sorry; fortunes of war."
In time the boarding party ordered the ship's company, save the "Africa Shell's" Master, into their lifeboats before stripping the "Africa Shell" of all foodstuffs including a small amount of wine.
The crew were ordered to row for shore, however Captain Dove was taken prisoner on board the "Graf Spee" where he was to be held captive. Capt. Dove was incensed by the interception of his ship, and complained personally to Capt. Langsdorff, citing that the "Africa Shell" was within Portuguese Territorial Waters and that the action was in clear violation of International Law.
With the crew of the "Africa Shell" making their way to the shore, and with Capt. Dove transferred to the "Graf Spee," the boarding party proceeded to set about the operation of sinking the tanker. Scuttling charges were placed within the ship, and their timers set, following which the party re-embarked in the motor launch and made their way back to the "Graf Spee." With all personnel safely aboard the "Graf Spee", Langsdorff and his crew observed the detonation of the charges which blew two holes in the "Africa Shell's" stern. Following this "Graf Spee" opened fire using some of her secondary armament of SK C/28 guns, sinking the "Africa Shell".
Battle of Madagascar.
The Mozambique Channel was a World War II clashpoint during the Battle of Madagascar.

