
The Norns (, plural: "") are deities in Norse mythology responsible for shaping the course of human destinies.
In the "Völuspá" attested by Snorri Sturluson, the three primary Norns Urðr (Wyrd), Verðandi, and Skuld draw water from their sacred well to nourish the tree at the center of the cosmos and prevent it from rot. These three Norns are described as powerful maiden giantesses (Jotuns) whose arrival from Jötunheimr ended the golden age of the gods. The Norns are also described as maidens of Mögþrasir in the "Vafþrúðnismál".
Beside the three Norns tending Yggdrasill, pre-Chrisitian Scandinavians attested to Norns who visit a newborn child in order to determine the person's future. These Norns could be malevolent or benevolent: the former causing tragic events in the world while the latter were kind and protective.
Etymology.
The origin of the name "norn" is uncertain, it may derive from a word meaning "to twine" and which would refer to their twining the thread of fate. Bek-Pedersen suggests that the word "norn" has relation to the Swedish dialect word "norna (nyrna)", a verb that means "secretly communicate". This relates to the perception of norns as shadowy, background figures who only really ever reveal their fateful secrets to men as their fates come to pass.
The name "Urðr" (Old English Wyrd, Weird) means "fate". "Wyrd" and "urðr" are etymological cognates, which does not guarantee that "wyrd" and "urðr" share the same semantic quality of "fate" over time. Both "Urðr" and "Verðandi" are derived from the Old Norse verb "verða", "to become". It is commonly asserted that while "Urðr" derives from the past tense ("that which became or happened"), "Verðandi" derives from the present tense of "verða" ("that which is happening"). "Skuld" is derived from the Old Norse verb "skulu", "need/ought to be/shall be"; its meaning is "that which should become, or that needs to occur". Due to this, it has often been inferred that the three norns are in some way connected with the past, present and future respectively, but it has been disputed that their names really imply a temporal distinction and it has been emphasised that the words do not in themselves denote chronological periods in Old Norse.
Relation to other Germanic female deities.
There is no clear distinction between norns, fylgjas, hamingjas and valkyries, nor with the generic term dísir. Moreover, artistic license permitted such terms to be used for mortal women in Old Norse poetry. To quote Snorri Sturluson's "Skáldskaparmál" on the various names used for women:
These unclear distinctions among norns and other Germanic female deities are discussed in Bek-Pedersen's book "Norns in Old Norse Mythology."
Attestations.
There are a number of surviving Old Norse sources that relate to the norns. The most important sources are the Prose Edda and the Poetic Edda. The latter contains pagan poetry where the norns are frequently referred to, while the former contains, in addition to pagan poetry, retellings, descriptions and commentaries by the 12th and 13th century Icelandic chieftain and scholar Snorri Sturluson.
Skaldic poetry.
A skaldic reference to the norns appears in Hvini's poem in "Ynglingatal" 24 found in "Ynglingasaga" 47, where King Halfdan is put to rest by his men at Borró. This reference brings in the phrase "norna dómr" which means "judgment of the nornir". In most cases, when the norns pass judgment, it means death to those who have been judged - in this case, Halfdan. Along with being associated with being bringers of death, Bek-Pedersen suggests that this phrase brings in a quasi-legal aspect to the nature of the norns. This legal association is employed quite frequently within skaldic and eddic sources. This phrase can also be seen as a threat, as death is the final and inevitable decision that the norns can make with regard to human life.
Poetic Edda.
The Poetic Edda is valuable in representing older material in poetry from which Snorri tapped information in the "Prose Edda". Like "Gylfaginning", the "Poetic Edda" mentions the existence of many lesser norns beside the three main norns. Moreover, it also agrees with "Gylfaginning" by telling that they were of several races and that the dwarven norns were the daughters of Dvalin. It also suggests that the three main norns were giantesses (female Jotuns).
"Fáfnismál" contains a discussion between the hero Sigurd and the dragon Fafnir who is dying from a mortal wound from Sigurd. The hero asks Fafnir of many things, among them the nature of the norns. Fafnir explains that they are many and from several races:
It appears from "Völuspá" and "Vafþrúðnismál" that the three main norns were not originally goddesses but giants (Jotuns), and that their arrival ended the early days of bliss for the gods, but that they come for the good of humankind.
"Völuspá" relates that three giants of huge might are reported to have arrived to the gods from Jotunheim:
"Vafþrúðnismál" probably refers to the norns when it talks of maiden giants who arrive to protect the people of earth as protective spirits (hamingjas):
The "Völuspá" contains the names of the three main Norns referring to them as maidens like "Vafþrúðnismál" probably does:
"Helgakviða Hundingsbana I".
The norns visited each newly born child to allot his or her future, and in "Helgakviða Hundingsbana I", the hero Helgi Hundingsbane has just been born and norns arrive at the homestead:
"Helgakviða Hundingsbana II".
In "Helgakviða Hundingsbana II", Helgi Hundingsbane blames the norns for the fact that he had to kill Sigrún's father Högni and brother Bragi in order to wed her:
"Reginsmál".
Like Snorri Sturluson stated in "Gylfaginning", people's fate depended on the benevolence or the malevolence of particular norns. In "Reginsmál", the water dwelling dwarf Andvari blames his plight on an evil norn, presumably one of the daughters of Dvalin:
"Sigurðarkviða hin skamma".
Another instance of Norns being blamed for an undesirable situation appears in "Sigurðarkviða hin skamma", where the valkyrie Brynhild blames malevolent norns for her long yearning for the embrace of Sigurd:
"Guðrúnarkviða II".
Brynhild's solution was to have Gunnarr and his brothers, the lords of the Burgundians, kill Sigurd and afterwards to commit suicide in order to join Sigurd in the afterlife. Her brother Atli (Attila the Hun) avenged her death by killing the lords of the Burgundians, but since he was married to their sister Guðrún, Atli would soon be killed by her. In "Guðrúnarkviða II", the Norns actively enter the series of events by informing Atli in a dream that his wife would kill him. The description of the dream begins with this stanza:
"Guðrúnarhvöt".
After having killed both her husband Atli and their sons, Guðrún blames the Norns for her misfortunes, as in "Guðrúnarhvöt", where Guðrún talks of trying to escaping the wrath of the norns by trying to kill herself:
"Hamðismál".
"Guðrúnarhvöt" deals with how Guðrún incited her sons to avenge the cruel death of their sister Svanhild. In "Hamðismál", her sons' expedition to the Gothic king Ermanaric to exact vengeance is fateful. Knowing that he is about to die at the hands of the Goths, her son Sörli talks of the cruelty of the norns:
"Sigrdrífumál".
Since the norns were beings of ultimate power who were working in the dark, it should be no surprise that they could be referred to in charms, as they are by Sigrdrífa in "Sigrdrífumál":
"Prose Edda".
In the part of Snorri Sturluson's "Prose Edda" which is called "Gylfaginning", Gylfi, the king of Sweden, has arrived at Valhalla calling himself Gangleri. There, he receives an education in Norse mythology from what is Odin in the shape of three men. They explain to Gylfi that there are three main norns, but also many others of various races, æsir, elves and dwarves:
The three main norns take water out of the well of Urd and water Yggdrasil:
Snorri furthermore informs the reader that the youngest norn, Skuld, is in effect also a valkyrie, taking part in the selection of warriors from the slain:
Legendary sagas.
Some of the legendary sagas also contain references to the norns. The "Hervarar saga" contains a poem named "Hlöðskviða", where the Gothic king Angantýr defeats a Hunnish invasion led by his Hunnish half-brother Hlöðr. Knowing that his sister, the shieldmaiden Hervör, is one of the casualties, Angantýr looks at his dead brother and laments the cruelty of the norns:
In younger legendary sagas, such as "Norna-Gests þáttr" and "Hrólfs saga kraka", the norns appear to have been synonymous with völvas (witches, female shamans). In "Norna-Gests þáttr", where they arrive at the birth of the hero to shape his destiny, the norns are not described as weaving the web of fate, instead "Norna" appears to be interchangeable and possibly a synonym of "vala" (völva).
One of the last legendary sagas to be written down, the "Hrólfs saga kraka" talks of the norns simply as evil witches. When the evil half-elven princess Skuld assembles her army to attack Hrólfr Kraki, it contains in addition to undead warriors, elves and norns.
Runic inscription N 351 M.
The belief in the norns as bringers of both gain and loss would last beyond Christianization, as testifies the runic inscription N 351 M from the Borgund stave church:
Franks Casket.
Three women carved on the right panel of Franks Casket, an Anglo-Saxon whalebone chest from the eighth century, have been identified by some scholars as being three norns.
Theories.
A number of theories have been proposed regarding the norns.
Matres and Matrones.
The Germanic Matres and Matrones, female deities venerated in North-West Europe from the 1st to the 5th century AD depicted on votive objects and altars almost entirely in groups of three from the first to the fifth century AD have been proposed as connected with the later Germanic dísir, valkyries, and norns, potentially stemming from them.
Three norns.
Theories have been proposed that there is no foundation in Norse mythology for the notion that the three main norns should each be associated exclusively with the past, the present, and the future; rather, all three represent "destiny" as it is twined with the flow of time. Moreover, theories have been proposed that the idea that there are three main norns may be due to a late influence from Greek and Roman mythology, where there are also spinning fate goddesses (Moirai and Parcae).
In popular culture.
The Norns are the main characters of the popular anime Ah! My Goddess. Verðandi (here named Belldandy because of Japanese transliteration) is the female protagonist of the series. Her older sister Urðr (Urd) and her younger sister Skuld are important supporting characters in the story.
Amon Amarth wrote a Death Metal album named Fate of Norns containing the title track "Fate of Norns" released in 2004.
Jack and Annie meet the Norns on one of their missions in Magic Tree House.
Norns are present in Philip K. Dick's "Galactic Pot-Healer", as entities keeping a book where the future is already written.
In Neil Gaiman's "American Gods", Norns are shown as three women (one very tall, one average height, the last a dwarf) who assist Shadow in his vigil for Wednesday (Odin) on the ash tree, then stay in a croft nearby; they revive Shadow's dead wife Laura by means of the water from the pit of Urd; and they prophesy to Mr. Town, an associate of Mr. World, that his neck will be broken.
The Norns appear in Kieron Gillen and Jamie McKelvie's 2014-2018 comic book "The Wicked + The Divine".
The Norns are alluded to in 2018's "God of War", the eighth installment in the "God of War" series, developed by Santa Monica Studio and published by Sony Interactive Entertainment (SIE), which began the franchise's foray into the lore of Norse mythology. As the story's protagonist Kratos and his young son, Atreus, set off on a journey through the realm of Midgard, they continuously encounter chests known as Nornir Chest, each of which can be opened by locating three hidden rune-seals and quickly striking all three with the Leviathan Axe. Each of the Nornir Chests contain collectibles that gradually upgrade Kratos’ Health and/or Rage meters.

