
In mathematics, open sets are a generalization of open intervals in the real line. In a metric space—that is, when a distance is defined—open sets are the sets that, with every point , contain all points that are sufficiently near to (that is, all points whose distance to is less than some value depending on ).
More generally, one defines open sets as the members of a given collection of subsets of a given set, a collection that has the property of containing every union of its members, every finite intersection of its members, the empty set, and the whole set itself. A set in which such a collection is given is called a topological space, and the collection is called a topology. These conditions are very loose, and allow enormous flexibility in the choice of open sets. For example, every subset can be open (the discrete topology), or no set can be open but the space itself and the empty set (the indiscrete topology).
In practice, however, open sets are usually chosen to provide a notion of nearness that is similar to that of metric spaces, without having a measure of distance defined. In particular, a topology allows defining properties such as continuity, connectedness, and compactness, which were originally defined by means of a distance.
The most common case of a topology without any distance is given by manifolds, which are topological spaces that, "near" each point, resemble an open set of a Euclidean space, but on which no distance is defined in general. Less intuitive topologies are used in other branches of mathematics; for example, the Zariski topology, which is fundamental in algebraic geometry and scheme theory.
Motivation.
Intuitively, an open set provides a method to distinguish two points. For example, if about one of two points in a topological space, there exists an open set not containing the other (distinct) point, the two points are referred to as topologically distinguishable. In this manner, one may speak of whether two points, or more generally two subsets, of a topological space are "near" without concretely defining a distance. Therefore, topological spaces may be seen as a generalization of spaces equipped with a notion of distance, which are called metric spaces.
In the set of all real numbers, one has the natural Euclidean metric; that is, a function which measures the distance between two real numbers: . Therefore, given a real number "x", one can speak of the set of all points close to that real number; that is, within "ε" of "x". In essence, points within ε of "x" approximate "x" to an accuracy of degree "ε". Note that "ε" &gt; 0 always but as "ε" becomes smaller and smaller, one obtains points that approximate "x" to a higher and higher degree of accuracy. For example, if "x" = 0 and "ε" = 1, the points within "ε" of "x" are precisely the points of the interval (−1, 1); that is, the set of all real numbers between −1 and 1. However, with "ε" = 0.5, the points within "ε" of "x" are precisely the points of (−0.5, 0.5). Clearly, these points approximate "x" to a greater degree of accuracy than when "ε" = 1.
The previous discussion shows, for the case "x" = 0, that one may approximate "x" to higher and higher degrees of accuracy by defining "ε" to be smaller and smaller. In particular, sets of the form (−"ε", "ε") give us a lot of information about points close to "x" = 0. Thus, rather than speaking of a concrete Euclidean metric, one may use sets to describe points close to "x". This innovative idea has far-reaching consequences; in particular, by defining different collections of sets containing 0 (distinct from the sets (−"ε", "ε")), one may find different results regarding the distance between 0 and other real numbers. For example, if we were to define R as the only such set for "measuring distance", all points are close to 0 since there is only one possible degree of accuracy one may achieve in approximating 0: being a member of R. Thus, we find that in some sense, every real number is distance 0 away from 0. It may help in this case to think of the measure as being a binary condition: all things in R are equally close to 0, while any item that is not in R is not close to 0.
In general, one refers to the family of sets containing 0, used to approximate 0, as a neighborhood basis; a member of this neighborhood basis is referred to as an open set. In fact, one may generalize these notions to an arbitrary set ("X"); rather than just the real numbers. In this case, given a point ("x") of that set, one may define a collection of sets "around" (that is, containing) "x", used to approximate "x". Of course, this collection would have to satisfy certain properties (known as axioms) for otherwise we may not have a well-defined method to measure distance. For example, every point in "X" should approximate "x" to "some" degree of accuracy. Thus "X" should be in this family. Once we begin to define "smaller" sets containing "x", we tend to approximate "x" to a greater degree of accuracy. Bearing this in mind, one may define the remaining axioms that the family of sets about "x" is required to satisfy.
Definitions.
Several definitions are given here, in an increasing order of technicality. Each one is a special case of the next one.
Euclidean space.
A subset formula_1 of the Euclidean -space is "open" if, for every point in formula_1, there exists a positive real number (depending on ) such that a point in belongs to formula_1 as soon as its Euclidean distance from is smaller than . Equivalently, a subset formula_1 of is open if every point in formula_1 is the center of an open ball contained in formula_6 
Metric space.
A subset "U" of a metric space is called "open" if, given any point "x" in "U", there exists a real number "ε" &gt; 0 such that, given any point formula_7 satisfying , "y" also belongs to "U". Equivalently, "U" is open if every point in "U" has a neighborhood contained in "U".
This generalizes the Euclidean space example, since Euclidean space with the Euclidean distance is a metric space.
Topological space.
A topological space is a set on which a topology is defined, which consists of a collection of subsets that are said to be "open", and satisfy the axioms given below.
More precisely, let formula_8 be a set. A family formula_9 of subsets of formula_8 is a "topology" on formula_8, and the elements of formula_9 are the "open sets" of the topology if
Infinite intersections of open sets need not be open. For example, the intersection of all intervals of the form formula_21 where formula_22 is a positive integer, is the set formula_23 which is not open in the real line.
A metric space is a topological space, whose topology consists of the collection of all subsets that are unions of open balls. There are, however, topological spaces that are not metric spaces.
Special types of open sets.
Clopen sets and non-open and/or non-closed sets.
A set might be open, closed, both, or neither. In particular, open and closed sets are not mutually exclusive, meaning that it is in general possible for a subset of a topological space to simultaneously be both an open subset a closed subset. Such subsets are known as . Explicitly, a subset formula_24 of a topological space formula_25 is called if both formula_24 and its complement formula_27 are open subsets of formula_25; or equivalently, if formula_29 and formula_30 
In topological space formula_31 the empty set formula_16 and the set formula_8 itself are always open. These two sets are the most well-known examples of clopen subsets and they show that clopen subsets exist in topological space. To see why formula_8 is clopen, begin by recalling that the sets formula_8 and formula_16 are, by definition, always open subsets (of formula_8). Also by definition, a subset formula_24 is called if (and only if) its complement in formula_39 which is the set formula_40 is an open subset. Because the complement (in formula_8) of the entire set formula_42 is the empty set (i.e. formula_43), which is an open subset, this means that formula_44 is a closed subset of formula_8 (by definition of "closed subset"). Hence, no matter what topology is placed on formula_39 the entire space formula_8 is simultaneously both an open subset and also a closed subset of formula_8; said differently, formula_8 is a clopen subset of formula_50 Because the empty set's complement is formula_51 which is an open subset, the same reasoning can be used to conclude that formula_52 is also a clopen subset of formula_50 
Consider the real line formula_54 endowed with its usual Euclidean topology, whose open sets are defined as follows: every interval formula_55 of real numbers belongs to the topology, every union of such intervals, e.g. formula_56 belongs to the topology, and as always, both formula_54 and formula_16 belong to the topology.
If a topological space formula_8 is endowed with the discrete topology (so that by definition, every subset of formula_8 is open) then every subset of formula_8 is a clopen subset. 
For a more advanced example reminiscent of the discrete topology, suppose that formula_75 is an ultrafilter on a non-empty set formula_50 Then the union formula_77 is a topology on formula_8 with the property that non-empty proper subset formula_24 of formula_8 is an open subset or else a closed subset, but never both; that is, if formula_81 (where formula_82) then of the following two statements is true: either (1) formula_29 or else, (2) formula_30 Said differently, subset is open or closed but the subsets that are both (i.e. that are clopen) are formula_16 and formula_50
Regular open sets.
A subset formula_24 of a topological space formula_8 is called a if formula_89 or equivalently, if formula_90 where formula_91 (resp. formula_92 formula_93) denotes the topological boundary (resp. interior, closure) of formula_24 in formula_50 
A topological space for which there exists a base consisting of regular open sets is called a . 
A subset of formula_8 is a regular open set if and only if its complement in formula_8 is a regular closed set, where by definition a subset formula_24 of formula_8 is called a if formula_100 or equivalently, if formula_101 
Every regular open set (resp. regular closed set) is an open subset (resp. is a closed subset) although in general, the converses are true.
Properties.
The union of any number of open sets, or infinitely many open sets, is open. The intersection of a finite number of open sets is open.
A complement of an open set (relative to the space that the topology is defined on) is called a closed set. A set may be both open and closed (a clopen set). The empty set and the full space are examples of sets that are both open and closed.
Uses.
Open sets have a fundamental importance in topology. The concept is required to define and make sense of topological space and other topological structures that deal with the notions of closeness and convergence for spaces such as metric spaces and uniform spaces.
Every subset "A" of a topological space "X" contains a (possibly empty) open set; the maximum (ordered under inclusion) such open set is called the interior of "A". 
It can be constructed by taking the union of all the open sets contained in "A".
A function formula_102 between two topological spaces formula_8 and formula_104 is if the preimage of every open set in formula_104 is open in formula_50
The function formula_102 is called if the image of every open set in formula_8 is open in formula_109
An open set on the real line has the characteristic property that it is a countable union of disjoint open intervals.
Notes and cautions.
"Open" is defined relative to a particular topology.
Whether a set is open depends on the topology under consideration. Having opted for greater brevity over greater clarity, we refer to a set "X" endowed with a topology formula_9 as "the topological space "X"" rather than "the topological space formula_25", despite the fact that all the topological data is contained in formula_112 If there are two topologies on the same set, a set "U" that is open in the first topology might fail to be open in the second topology. For example, if "X" is any topological space and "Y" is any subset of "X", the set "Y" can be given its own topology (called the 'subspace topology') defined by "a set "U" is open in the subspace topology on "Y" if and only if "U" is the intersection of "Y" with an open set from the original topology on "X"." This potentially introduces new open sets: if "V" is open in the original topology on "X", but formula_113 isn't open in the original topology on "X", then formula_113 is open in the subspace topology on "Y".
As a concrete example of this, if "U" is defined as the set of rational numbers in the interval formula_115 then "U" is an open subset of the rational numbers, but not of the real numbers. This is because when the surrounding space is the rational numbers, for every point "x" in "U", there exists a positive number "a" such that all points within distance "a" of "x" are also in "U". On the other hand, when the surrounding space is the reals, then for every point "x" in "U" there is positive "a" such that all points within distance "a" of "x" are in "U" (because "U" contains no non-rational numbers).
Generalizations of open sets.
Throughout, formula_25 will be a topological space. 
A subset formula_117 of a topological space formula_8 is called:
Using the fact that 
whenever two subsets formula_121 satisfy formula_122 the following may be deduced:
Moreover, a subset is a regular open set if and only if it is preopen and semi-closed. The intersection of an α-open set and a semi-preopen (resp. semi-open, preopen, b-open) set is a semi-preopen (resp. semi-open, preopen, b-open) set. Preopen sets need not be semi-open and semi-open sets need not be preopen. 
Arbitrary unions of preopen (resp. α-open, b-open, semi-preopen) sets are once again preopen (resp. α-open, b-open, semi-preopen). However, finite intersections of preopen sets need not be preopen. The set of all α-open subsets of a space formula_25 forms a topology on formula_8 that is finer than formula_112 
A topological space formula_8 is Hausdorff if and only if every compact subspace of formula_8 is θ-closed. 
A space formula_8 is totally disconnected if and only if every regular closed subset is preopen or equivalently, if every semi-open subset is preopen. Moreover, the space is totally disconnected if and only if the of every preopen subset is open.

