
Oxbridge is a portmanteau of Oxford and Cambridge, the two oldest, wealthiest, and most famous universities in the United Kingdom. As of 2018, less than 1% of individuals applying to undergraduate courses through UCAS were admitted to these institutions. The term is used to refer to them collectively, in contrast to other British universities, and more broadly to describe characteristics reminiscent of them, often with implications of superior social or intellectual status or elitism.
Origins.
Although both universities were founded more than eight centuries ago, the term "Oxbridge" is relatively recent. In William Thackeray's novel "Pendennis", published in 1850, the main character attends the fictional Boniface College, Oxbridge. According to the "Oxford English Dictionary", this is the first recorded instance of the word. Virginia Woolf used it, citing Thackeray, in her 1929 essay "A Room of One's Own". By 1957 the term was used in the "Times Educational Supplement" and in "Universities Quarterly" by 1958.
When expanded, the universities are almost always referred to as "Oxford and Cambridge", the order in which they were founded. A notable exception is Tokyo's "Cambridge and Oxford Society", probably arising from the fact that the Cambridge Club was founded there first, and also had more members than its Oxford counterpart when they amalgamated in 1905.
Meaning.
In addition to being a collective term, "Oxbridge" is often used as shorthand for characteristics the two institutions share:
Criticism.
The word "Oxbridge" may also be used pejoratively: as a descriptor of social class (referring to the professional classes who dominated the intake of both universities at the beginning of the twentieth century), as shorthand for an elite that "continues to dominate Britain's political and cultural establishment" and a parental attitude that "continues to see UK higher education through an Oxbridge prism", or to describe a "pressure-cooker" culture that attracts and then fails to support overachievers "who are vulnerable to a kind of self-inflicted stress that can all too often become unbearable" and high-flying state school students who find "coping with the workload very difficult in terms of balancing work and life" and "feel socially out of [their] depth".
The Sutton Trust maintains that the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge recruit disproportionately from 8 schools (Westminster School, Eton College, Hills Road Sixth Form College, St Paul's School, Peter Symonds College, St Paul's Girls' School, King's College School, Magdalen College School). They examined published admissions data from 2015 to 2017 and found that 8 schools accounted for 1,310 Oxbridge places during the three years, whereas 2,900 other schools accounted for 1,220.
Access Oxbridge.
Access Oxbridge is a non-profit organisation which connects students from low-income backgrounds with undergraduate mentors studying at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge. The organisation was set up by Oxford graduate Joe Seddon in response to data from the Sutton Trust suggesting that academically-gifted students from low income backgrounds are underrepresented at highly-selective universities. The mentoring sessions take place in hour-long video calls via the Access Oxbridge app.
Seddon founded Access Oxbridge at the age of 21 and initially funded the organisation from the remnants of his university maintenance grant. Within its first year, Access Oxbridge recruited over 500 undergraduate volunteers to mentor 200 students in Year 12 and 13 from underrepresented backgrounds, resulting in 50 of those students achieving offers to study at Oxford and Cambridge.
In 2019, Seddon relaunched Access Oxbridge as a mobile app. That year, 60 students from the program achieved offers to study at Oxford and Cambridge. In October 2019, Seddon was awarded the Prime Minister's Points of Light award for social impact in education.
Related terms.
Other portmanteaus have been coined that extend the term "Oxbridge", with different degree of recognition. 
The term Loxbridge is also used referring to the golden triangle of London, Oxford, and Cambridge. It was also adopted as the name of the Ancient History conference now known as "AMPAH". Doxbridge is another example of this, referring to Durham, Oxford and Cambridge. "Doxbridge" was also used for an annual inter-collegiate sports tournament between some of the colleges of Durham, Oxford, Cambridge and York. Meanwhile, "Woxbridge" is seen in the name of the annual Woxbridge conference between the business schools of Warwick, Oxford and Cambridge.
Thackeray's "Pendennis", which introduced the term "Oxbridge", also introduced "Camford" as another combination of the university names – "he was a Camford man and very nearly got the English Prize Poem" – but this term has never achieved the same degree of usage as "Oxbridge". Camford is, however, used as the name of a fictional university city in the Sherlock Holmes story "The Adventure of the Creeping Man" (1923).

