
In probability theory and statistics, a probability distribution is the mathematical function that gives the probabilities of occurrence of different possible outcomes for an experiment. It is a mathematical description of a random phenomenon in terms of its sample space and the probabilities of events (subsets of the sample space).
For instance, if is used to denote the outcome of a coin toss ("the experiment"), then the probability distribution of would take the value 0.5 (1 in 2 or 1/2) for , and 0.5 for (assuming that the coin is fair). Examples of random phenomena include the weather condition in a future date, the height of a randomly selected person, the fraction of male students in a school, the results of a survey to be conducted, etc.
Introduction.
A probability distribution is a mathematical description of the probabilities of events, subsets of the sample space. The sample space, often denoted by formula_1, is the set of all possible outcomes of a random phenomenon being observed; it may be any set: a set of real numbers, a set of vectors, a set of arbitrary non-numerical values, etc. For example, the sample space of a coin flip would be .
To define probability distributions for the specific case of random variables (so the sample space can be seen as a numeric set), it is common to distinguish between discrete and continuous random variables. In the discrete case, it is sufficient to specify a probability mass function formula_2 assigning a probability to each possible outcome: for example, when throwing a fair die, each of the six values 1 to 6 has the probability 1/6. The probability of an event is then defined to be the sum of the probabilities of the outcomes that satisfy the event; for example, the probability of the event "the dice rolls an even value" is 
In contrast, when a random variable takes values from a continuum then typically, any individual outcome has probability zero and only events that include infinitely many outcomes, such as intervals, can have positive probability. For example, consider measuring the weight of a piece of ham in the supermarket, and assume the scale has many digits of precision. The probability that it weighs "exactly" 500 g is zero, as it will most likely have some non-zero decimal digits. Nevertheless, one might demand, in quality control, that a package of "500 g" of ham must weigh between 490 g and 510 g with at least 98% probability, and this demand is less sensitive to the accuracy of measurement instruments.
Continuous probability distributions can be described in several ways. The probability density function describes the infinitesimal probability of any given value, and the probability that the outcome lies in a given interval can be computed by integrating the probability density function over that interval. An alternative description of the distribution is by means of the cumulative distribution function, which describes the probability that the random variable is no larger than a given value (i.e., for some "x"). The cumulative distribution function is the area under the probability density function from formula_4 to "x", as described by the picture to the right.
General definition.
A probability distribution can be described in various forms, such as by a probability mass function or a cumulative distribution function. One of the most general descriptions, which applies for continuous and discrete variables, is by means of a probability function formula_5 whose input space formula_6 is related to the sample space, and gives a probability as its output.
The probability function "P" can take as argument subsets of the sample space itself, as in the coin toss example, where the function "P" was defined so that "P" and "P". However, because of the widespread use of random variables, which transform the sample space into a set of numbers (e.g., formula_7, formula_8), it is more common to study probability distributions whose argument are subsets of these particular kinds of sets (number sets), and all probability distributions discussed in this article are of this type. It is common to denote as the probability that a certain variable "X" belongs to a certain event "E".
The above probability function only characterizes a probability distribution if it satisfies all the Kolmogorov axioms, that is:
The concept of probability function is made more rigorous by defining it as the element of a probability space formula_9, where formula_10 is the set of possible outcomes, formula_6 is the set of all subsets formula_12 whose probability can be measured, and formula_13 is the probability function, or probability measure, that assigns a probability to each of these measurable subsets formula_14.
Probability distributions are generally divided into two classes. A discrete probability distribution is applicable to the scenarios where the set of possible outcomes is discrete (e.g. a coin toss, a roll of a dice) and the probabilities are encoded by a discrete list of the probabilities of the outcomes; in this case the discrete probability distribution is known as probability mass function. On the other hand, continuous probability distributions are applicable to scenarios where the set of possible outcomes can take on values in a continuous range (e.g. real numbers), such as the temperature on a given day. In the case of real numbers, the continuous probability distribution is the cumulative distribution function. In general, in the continuous case, probabilties are described by a probability density function, and the probability distribution is by definition the integral of the probability density function. The normal distribution is a commonly encountered continuous probability distribution. More complex experiments, such as those involving stochastic processes defined in continuous time, may demand the use of more general probability measures.
A probability distribution whose sample space is one-dimensional (for example real numbers, list of labels, ordered labels or binary) is called univariate, while a distribution whose sample space is a vector space of dimension 2 or more is called multivariate. A univariate distribution gives the probabilities of a single random variable taking on various alternative values; a multivariate distribution (a joint probability distribution) gives the probabilities of a random vector – a list of two or more random variables – taking on various combinations of values. Important and commonly encountered univariate probability distributions include the binomial distribution, the hypergeometric distribution, and the normal distribution. A commonly encountered multivariate distribution is the multivariate normal distribution.
Besides the probability function, the cumulative distribution function, the probability mass function and the probability density function, the moment generating function and the characteristic function also serve to identify a probability distribution, as they uniquely determine an underlying cumulative distribution function.
Terminology.
Some key concepts and terms, widely used in the literature on the topic of probability distributions, are listed below.
Discrete probability distribution.
A discrete probability distribution is a probability distribution that can take on a countable number of values. In the case where the range of values is countably infinite, these values have to decline to zero fast enough for the probabilities to add up to 1. For example, if formula_32 for "n" = 1, 2, ..., the sum of probabilities would be 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + ... = 1.
Well-known discrete probability distributions used in statistical modeling include the Poisson distribution, the Bernoulli distribution, the binomial distribution, the geometric distribution, and the negative binomial distribution. Additionally, the discrete uniform distribution is commonly used in computer programs that make equal-probability random selections between a number of choices.
When a sample (a set of observations) is drawn from a larger population, the sample points have an empirical distribution that is discrete, and which provides information about the population distribution.
Cumulative distribution function.
Equivalently to the above, a discrete random variable can be defined as a random variable whose cumulative distribution function (cdf) increases only by jump discontinuities—that is, its cdf increases only where it "jumps" to a higher value, and is constant between those jumps. Note however that the points where the cdf jumps may form a dense set of the real numbers. The points where jumps occur are precisely the values which the random variable may take.
Delta-function representation.
Consequently, a discrete probability distribution is often represented as a generalized probability density function involving Dirac delta functions, which substantially unifies the treatment of continuous and discrete distributions. This is especially useful when dealing with probability distributions involving both a continuous and a discrete part.
Indicator-function representation.
For a discrete random variable "X", let "u"0, "u"1, ... be the values it can take with non-zero probability. Denote
These are disjoint sets, and for such sets
It follows that the probability that "X" takes any value except for "u"0, "u"1, ... is zero, and thus one can write "X" as
except on a set of probability zero, where formula_36 is the indicator function of "A". This may serve as an alternative definition of discrete random variables.
Continuous probability distribution.
A continuous probability distribution is a probability distribution whose support is an uncountable set, such as an interval in the real line. They are uniquely characterized by a cumulative distribution function that can be used to calculate the probability for each subset of the support. There are many examples of continuous probability distributions: normal, uniform, chi-squared, and others.
A random variable formula_10 has a continuous probability distribution if there is a function formula_38 such that for each interval formula_39 the probability of formula_10 belonging to formula_41 is given by the integral of formula_42 over formula_41. For example, if formula_44, then we would have:
In particular, the probability for formula_10 to take any single value formula_47 (that is, formula_48) is zero, because an integral with coinciding upper and lower limits is always equal to zero. A variable that satisfies the above is called continuous random variable. Its cumulative density function is defined as
which, by this definition, has the properties:
It is also possible to think in the opposite direction, which allows more flexibility: if formula_50 is a function that satisfies all but the last of the properties above, then formula_51 represents the cumulative density function for some random variable: a discrete random variable if formula_51 is a step function, and a continuous random variable otherwise. This allows for continuous distributions that has a cumulative density function, but not a probability density function, such as the Cantor distribution.
It is often necessary to generalize the above definition for more arbitrary subsets of the real line. In these contexts, a continuous probability distribution is defined as a probability distribution with a cumulative distribution function that is absolutely continuous. Equivalently, it is a probability distribution on the real numbers that is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure. Such distributions can be represented by their probability density functions. If formula_10 is such an absolutely continuous random variable, then it has a probability density function formula_54, and its probability of falling into a Lebesgue-measurable set formula_55 is:
where formula_57 is the Lebesgue measure.
Note on terminology: some authors use the term "continuous distribution" to denote distributions whose cumulative distribution functions are continuous, rather than absolutely continuous. These distributions are the ones formula_57 such that formula_59 for all formula_60. This definition includes the (absolutely) continuous distributions defined above, but it also includes singular distributions, which are neither absolutely continuous nor discrete nor a mixture of those, and do not have a density. An example is given by the Cantor distribution.
Kolmogorov definition.
In the measure-theoretic formalization of probability theory, a random variable is defined as a measurable function formula_10 from a probability space formula_62 to a measurable space formula_63. Given that probabilities of events of the form formula_64 satisfy Kolmogorov's probability axioms, the probability distribution of "X" is the pushforward measure formula_65 of formula_10 , which is a probability measure on formula_63 satisfying formula_68.
Other kinds of distributions.
Continuous and discrete distributions with support on formula_69 or formula_70 are extremely useful to model a myriad of phenomena, since most practical distributions are supported on relatively simple subsets, such as hypercubes or balls. However, this is not always the case, and there exist phenomena with supports that are actually complicated curves formula_71 within some space formula_72 or similar. In these cases, the probability distribution is supported on the image of such curve, and is likely to be determined empirically, rather than finding a closed formula for it.
One example is shown in the figure to the right, which displays the evolution of a system of differential equations (commonly known as the Rabinovich–Fabrikant equations) that can be used to model the behaviour of Langmuir waves in plasma. When one studies this phenomenon, they observe states from the subset indicated in red. So one could ask what is the probability of observing a state in a certain position of the red subset; if such a probability exists, it is called the probability measure of the system.
This kind of complicated support appear quite frequently in dynamical systems. It is not simple to establish that the system has a probability measure, and the main problem is the following. Let formula_73 be instants in time and formula_74 a subset of the support, if the probability measure exists for the system, one would expect the frequency of observing states inside set formula_74 would be equal in interval formula_76 and formula_77, which might not happen; for example, it could oscillate similar to a sine formula_78, whose limit when formula_79 does not converge. Formally, the measure exists only if the limit of the relative frequency converges when the system is observed until the infinite future. The branch of dynamical systems that studies the existence of a probability measure is ergodic theory.
Note that even in these cases, the probability distribution, if it exists, might still be denominated "continuous" or "discrete" depending on whether the support is uncountable or countable, respectively.
Random number generation.
Most algorithms are based on a pseudorandom number generator that produces numbers "X" that are uniformly distributed in the half-open interval [0,1). These random variates "X" are then transformed via some algorithm to create a new random variate having the required probability distribution. With this source of uniform pseudo-randomness, realizations of any random variable can be generated.
For example, suppose formula_80 has a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. To construct a random Bernoulli variable for some formula_81, we define
&lt;math&gt;{\displaystyle X ={\begin{cases}1,&amp;{\mbox{if }}U
so that
&lt;math&gt;\textrm{P}(X=1) = \textrm{P}(U
This random variable X has a Bernoulli distribution with parameter formula_2. Note that this is a transformation of discrete random variable.
For a distribution function formula_51 of a continuous random variable, a continuous random variable must be constructed. formula_84, an inverse function of formula_51, relates to the uniform variable formula_80:
formula_87
For example, suppose a random variable that has an exponential distribution formula_88 must be constructed.
formula_89
so formula_90 and if formula_80 has a formula_92 distribution, then the random variable formula_10 is defined by formula_94. This has an exponential distribution of formula_95.
A frequent problem in statistical simulations (the Monte Carlo method) is the generation of pseudo-random numbers that are distributed in a given way.
Common probability distributions and their applications.
The concept of the probability distribution and the random variables which they describe underlies the mathematical discipline of probability theory, and the science of statistics. There is spread or variability in almost any value that can be measured in a population (e.g. height of people, durability of a metal, sales growth, traffic flow, etc.); almost all measurements are made with some intrinsic error; in physics, many processes are described probabilistically, from the kinetic properties of gases to the quantum mechanical description of fundamental particles. For these and many other reasons, simple numbers are often inadequate for describing a quantity, while probability distributions are often more appropriate.
The following is a list of some of the most common probability distributions, grouped by the type of process that they are related to. For a more complete list, see list of probability distributions, which groups by the nature of the outcome being considered (discrete, continuous, multivariate, etc.)
All of the univariate distributions below are singly peaked; that is, it is assumed that the values cluster around a single point. In practice, actually observed quantities may cluster around multiple values. Such quantities can be modeled using a mixture distribution.

