
Politics of French Polynesia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic French overseas collectivity, whereby the President of French Polynesia is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Assembly of French Polynesia.
Between 1946 and 2003, French Polynesia had the status of an overseas territory (French: "territoire d'outre-mer", or "TOM"). In 2003 it became an overseas collectivity (French: "collectivité d'outre-mer", or COM). Its statutory law of 27 February 2004 gives it the particular designation of "overseas country" to underline the large autonomy of the territory.
Executive branch.
The President of the French Republic is represented by the High Commissioner of the Republic in French Polynesia ("Haut-Commissaire de la République en Polynésie française"). The government is headed by the President of French Polynesia. He submits as Council of Ministers a list of members of the Territorial Assembly, the Assembly of French Polynesia ("Assemblée de la Polynésie française"), for approval by them to serve as ministers.
It has been hinted new elected president on September 14 will be an interim president before a new round of fresh parliamentary elections expected to take place by the end of the year, followed by a new presidential election.
Legislative branch.
French Polynesia elects the Assembly of French Polynesia ("Assemblée de la Polynésie française"), the unicameral legislature on the territorial level. The Assembly of French Polynesia has 57 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation in multi-seat constituencies. Since the territorial elections of March 6, 2001, the parity bill now binds that the number of women matches the number of men at the Assembly.
Political parties and elections.
The members of the Assembly of French Polynesia are elected in 6 different electoral districts or electoral circumscriptions () which slightly differ from the administrative subdivisions ("subdivisions administratives") on the Tuamotus and the Gambier Islands. The 6 electoral circumscriptions ("circonscriptions électorales") are:
Judicial branch.
Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel; Court of the First Instance or Tribunal de Premiere Instance; Court of Administrative Law or Tribunal Administratif.
Administrative divisions.
French Polynesia has 5 administrative subdivisions ():
"note:" Clipperton Island (), just off the coast of Mexico, was administered by France from French Polynesia.
International organization participation.
ESCAP (associate), FZ, ITUC, SPC, WMO

