
In mathematics, a partial function from a set to a set is a function from a subset of (possibly itself) to . The subset , that is, the domain of viewed as a function, is called the domain of definition of . If equals , that is, if is defined on every element in , then is said to be total.
More technically, a partial function is a binary relation over two sets that associates every element of the first set to "at most" one element of the second set; it is thus a functional binary relation. It generalizes the concept of a (total) function by not requiring every element of the first set to be associated to "exactly" one element of the second set.
A partial function is often used when its exact domain of definition is not known or difficult to specify. This is the case in calculus, where, for example, the quotient of two functions is a partial function whose domain of definition cannot contain the zeros of the denominator. For this reason, in calculus, and more generally in mathematical analysis, a partial function is generally called simply a "function". In computability theory, a general recursive function is a partial function from the integers to the integers; for many of them no algorithm can exist for deciding whether they are in fact total.
When arrow notation is used for functions, a partial function from to is sometimes written as , , or . However, there is no general convention, and the latter notation is more commonly used for injective functions..
Specifically, for a partial function , and any , one has either:
For example, if is the square root function restricted to the integers
then is only defined if is a perfect square (that is, ). So, , but is undefined.
Basic concepts.
A partial function is said to be injective, surjective, or bijective when the function given by the restriction of the partial function to its domain of definition is injective, surjective, bijective respectively.
Because a function is trivially surjective when restricted to its image, the term partial bijection denotes a partial function which is injective.
An injective partial function may be inverted to an injective partial function, and a partial function which is both injective and surjective has an injective function as inverse. Furthermore, a function which is injective may be inverted to an injective partial function.
The notion of transformation can be generalized to partial functions as well. A partial transformation is a function , where both and are subsets of some set .
Function.
A function is a binary relation that is functional (also called right-unique) and serial (also called left-total). This is a stronger definition than that of a partial function which only requires the functional property.
Function spaces.
The set of all partial functions from a set "X" to a set "Y", denoted by , is the union of all functions defined on subsets of "X" with same codomain "Y":
the latter also written as formula_2. In finite case, its cardinality is
because any partial function can be extended to a function by any fixed value "c" not contained in "Y", so that the codomain is }, an operation which is injective (unique and invertible by restriction).
Discussion and examples.
The first diagram at the top of the article represents a partial function that is "not" a function since the element 1 in the left-hand set is not associated with anything in the right-hand set. Whereas, the second diagram represents a function since every element on the left-hand set is associated with exactly one element in the right hand set.
Natural logarithm.
Consider the natural logarithm function mapping the real numbers to themselves. The logarithm of a non-positive real is not a real number, so the natural logarithm function doesn't associate any real number in the codomain with any non-positive real number in the domain. Therefore, the natural logarithm function is not a function when viewed as a function from the reals to themselves, but it is a partial function. If the domain is restricted to only include the positive reals (that is, if the natural logarithm function is viewed as a function from the positive reals to the reals), then the natural logarithm is a function.
Subtraction of natural numbers.
Subtraction of natural numbers (non-negative integers) can be viewed as a partial function:
It is defined only when formula_6.
Bottom element.
In denotational semantics a partial function is considered as returning the bottom element when it is undefined.
In computer science a partial function corresponds to a subroutine that raises an exception or loops forever. The IEEE floating point standard defines a not-a-number value which is returned when a floating point operation is undefined and exceptions are suppressed, e.g. when the square root of a negative number is requested.
In a programming language where function parameters are statically typed, a function may be defined as a partial function because the language's type system cannot express the exact domain of the function, so the programmer instead gives it the smallest domain which is expressible as a type and contains the domain of definition of the function.
In category theory.
In category theory, when considering the operation of morphism composition in concrete categories, the composition operation formula_7 is a function if and only if formula_8 has one element. The reason for this is that two morphisms formula_9 and formula_10 can only be composed as formula_11 if formula_12, that is, the codomain of formula_13 must equal the domain of formula_14.
The category of sets and partial functions is equivalent to but not isomorphic with the category of pointed sets and point-preserving maps. One textbook notes that "This formal completion of sets and partial maps by adding “improper,” “infinite” elements was reinvented many times, in particular, in topology (one-point compactification) and in theoretical computer science."
The category of sets and partial bijections is equivalent to its dual. It is the prototypical inverse category.
In abstract algebra.
Partial algebra generalizes the notion of universal algebra to partial operations. An example would be a field, in which the multiplicative inversion is the only proper partial operation (because division by zero is not defined).
The set of all partial functions (partial transformations) on a given base set, "X", forms a regular semigroup called the semigroup of all partial transformations (or the partial transformation semigroup on "X"), typically denoted by formula_15. The set of all partial bijections on "X" forms the symmetric inverse semigroup.
Charts and atlases for manifolds and fiber bundles.
Charts in the atlases which specify the structure of manifolds and fiber bundles are partial functions. In the case of manifolds, the domain is the point set of the manifold. In the case of fiber bundles, the domain is the space of the fiber bundle. In these applications, the most important construction is the transition map, which is the composite of one chart with the inverse of another. The initial classification of manifolds and fiber bundles is largely expressed in terms of constraints on these transition maps.
The reason for the use of partial functions instead of functions is to permit general global topologies to be represented by stitching together local patches to describe the global structure. The "patches" are the domains where the charts are defined.

