
In Greek mythology, Pasiphaë (; "Pasipháē", "wide-shining" derived from πᾶς "pas" "all, for all, of all" and φάος/φῶς "phaos/phos" "light") was a queen of Crete.
Family.
Pasiphaë was the daughter of Perse (one of the Oceanid nymphs) and Helios, the god of the Sun. She was thus the sister of Aeëtes, Circe and Perses. In some accounts, Pasiphaë's mother was identified as the island-nymph Crete herself. Like her doublet Europa, the consort of Zeus, her origins were in the East, in her case at Colchis; she was the sister of Circe, Aeëtes and Perses of Colchis, and she was given in marriage to King Minos of Crete. With Minos, she was the mother of Acacallis, Ariadne, Androgeus, Glaucus, Deucalion, Phaedra, Xenodice, and Catreus. She was also the mother of "star-like" Asterion, called the Minotaur.
The Minotaur.
After a curse from Poseidon, Pasiphaë experienced lust for and mated with a white bull sent by Poseidon. Mythological scholars and authors Ruck and Staples remarked that "the Bull was the old pre-Olympian Poseidon". 
In the Greek literalistic understanding of a Minoan myth, in order to actually copulate with the bull, she had the Athenian artificer Daedalus construct a portable wooden cow with a cowhide covering, within which she was able to satisfy her strong desire. This interpretation reduced a near-divine figure (a daughter of the Sun) to a stereotyped emblem of grotesque bestiality and the shocking excesses of lust and deceit. Pasiphaë appeared in Virgil's "Eclogue VI" (45–60), in Silenus' list of suitable mythological subjects, on which Virgil lingers in such detail that he gives the sixteen-line episode the weight of a brief inset myth. In Ovid's "Ars Amatoria" Pasiphaë is framed in zoophilic terms: "Pasiphae fieri gaudebat adultera tauri"—"Pasiphaë took pleasure in becoming an adulteress with a bull."
The Curse of Pasiphaë.
In other aspects, Pasiphaë, like her niece Medea, was a mistress of magical herbal arts in the Greek imagination. The author of "Bibliotheke" (3.197–198) records the fidelity charm she placed upon Minos, who would ejaculate serpents, scorpions, and centipedes killing any unlawful concubine; but Procris, with a protective herb, lay with Minos with impunity.
On divination.
In mainland Greece, Pasiphaë was worshipped as an oracular goddess at Thalamae, one of the original "koine" of Sparta. The geographer Pausanias describes the shrine as small, situated near a clear stream, and flanked by bronze statues of Helios and Pasiphaë. His account also equates Pasiphaë with Ino and the lunar goddess Selene.
Cicero writes in "De Divinatione" 1.96 that the Spartan ephors would sleep at the shrine of Pasiphaë, seeking prophetic dreams to aid them in governance. According to Plutarch, Spartan society twice underwent major upheavals sparked by ephors' dreams at the shrine during the Hellenistic era. In one case, an ephor dreamed that some of his colleagues' chairs were removed from the agora, and that a voice called out "this is better for Sparta"; inspired by this, King Cleomenes acted to consolidate royal power. Again during the reign of King Agis, several ephors brought the people into revolt with oracles from Pasiphaë's shrine promising remission of debts and redistribution of land.
Possible celestial deity.
In "Description of Greece", Pausanias equates Pasiphaë with Selene, implying that the figure was worshipped as a lunar deity. However, further studies on Minoan religion indicate that the sun was a female figure, suggesting instead that Pasiphaë was originally a solar goddess, an interpretation consistent with her depiction as Helios' daughter. Poseidon's bull may in turn be vestigial of the lunar bull prevalent in Ancient Mesopotamian religion.

