
Patrick Jake O'Rourke (born November 14, 1947) is an American political satirist and journalist. O'Rourke is the H. L. Mencken Research Fellow at the libertarian Cato Institute and is a regular correspondent for "The Atlantic Monthly", "The American Spectator", and "The Weekly Standard", and frequent panelist on National Public Radio's game show "Wait Wait... Don't Tell Me!" Since 2011, he has been a columnist at "The Daily Beast".
In the UK, he is known as the face of a long-running series of television advertisements for British Airways in the 1990s. He is the author of 20 books, the best known of which are "Holidays in Hell", a compilation of O'Rourke's articles as a free-lance foreign correspondent, and "All the Trouble in the World", an examination of current political concerns such as global warming and famine from a libertarian perspective.
The "Forbes Media Guide Five Hundred, 1994" states, "O'Rourke's original reporting, irreverent humor, and crackerjack writing makes for delectable reading. He never minces words or pulls his punches, whatever the subject."
Life and career.
O'Rourke was born in Toledo, Ohio, the son of Delphine (née Loy), a housewife, and Clifford Bronson O'Rourke, a car salesman. He graduated from Toledo's DeVilbiss High School in 1965, received his undergraduate degree from Miami University in 1969 and earned an M.A. in English at Johns Hopkins University (where he was a brother of the Alpha Delta Phi fraternity) in 1970. Many of O'Rourke's essays recount that during his student days he was a leftist, anti-war hippie, but that in the 1970s his political views underwent a "volte-face". He emerged as a political observer and humorist rooted in libertarian conservatism.
O'Rourke wrote articles for several publications, including "A.J. at N.Y.U." for "The Rip Off Review of Western Culture", an underground magazine/comic book, in 1972, as well as pieces for the Baltimore underground newspaper "Harry" and the "New York Ace", before joining "National Lampoon" in 1973, where he served as editor-in-chief, among other roles, and authored articles such as "Foreigners Around the World" and "How to Drive Fast on Drugs While Getting Your Wing-Wang Squeezed and Not Spill Your Drink."
He received a writing credit for "National Lampoon's Lemmings" which helped launch the careers of John Belushi, Chevy Chase, and Christopher Guest. He also co-wrote "National Lampoon's 1964 High School Yearbook" with Douglas Kenney. O'Rourke said later that Kenney brought comedy to the piece and he brought the organization. The "Yearbook" was a bestseller and some themes were later used in the movie "Animal House".
Going freelance in 1981, O'Rourke's writing appeared in "Playboy," "Vanity Fair," "Car and Driver", and "Rolling Stone". He became foreign-affairs desk chief at "Rolling Stone", where he remained until 2001. In 1996, he served as the conservative commentator in the point-counterpoint segment of "60 Minutes". During the Bosnian genocide, O'Rourke received criticism for using the American public's lack of interest in Bosnia as a way to joke about "unspellables killing the unpronouncables."
O'Rourke has published 16 books, including three "New York Times" bestsellers. "Parliament of Whores" and "Give War a Chance" reached #1 on "The New York Times" Best Seller list. O'Rourke was a "Real Time Real Reporter" for "Real Time with Bill Maher" covering the 2008 presidential election.
Personal life.
O'Rourke was married to Amy Lumet, a daughter of movie director Sidney Lumet and a granddaughter of Lena Horne, from 1990 to 1993. Since 1995 he has been married to his second wife, Tina; they have two daughters, Elizabeth and Olivia, and one son, Clifford. In an interview with "The New Statesman", O'Rourke revealed that his "wife is a Catholic, the kids are Catholic" and described himself as, therefore, a "Catholic fellow-traveller". The family divides their time between Sharon, New Hampshire and Washington, D.C..
O'Rourke revealed on September 28, 2008, that he had been diagnosed with treatable anal cancer, from which he expected "a 95% chance of survival."
In 2009, O'Rourke described the presidency of Barack Obama as "the Carter administration in better sweaters". However, in 2016, he endorsed presidential candidate Hillary Clinton over Donald Trump. O'Rourke stated that his endorsement included her "lies and empty promises," and said, "She's wrong about absolutely everything, but she's wrong within normal parameters."
Writing.
O'Rourke was a proponent of Gonzo journalism; one of his earliest and best-regarded pieces was "How to Drive Fast on Drugs While Getting Your Wing-Wang Squeezed and Not Spill Your Drink", a "National Lampoon" article in March 1979. The article was republished in two of his books, "Republican Party Reptile" (1987) and "Driving Like Crazy" (2009).
O'Rourke's best-received book is "Parliament of Whores", subtitled "A Lone Humorist Attempts to Explain the Entire U.S. Government", whose main argument, according to the author, "is that politics are boring". He has described himself as a libertarian.
O'Rourke types his manuscripts on an IBM Selectric typewriter, though he denies that he is a Luddite, asserting that his short attention span would make focusing on writing on a computer difficult.

