
In mathematics, real analysis is the branch of mathematical analysis that studies the behavior of real numbers, sequences and series of real numbers, and real functions. Some particular properties of real-valued sequences and functions that real analysis studies include convergence, limits, continuity, smoothness, differentiability and integrability.
Real analysis is distinguished from complex analysis, which deals with the study of complex numbers and their functions.
Scope.
Construction of the real numbers.
The theorems of real analysis rely intimately upon the structure of the real number line. The real number system consists of an uncountable set (formula_1), together with two binary operations denoted and , and an order denoted . The operations make the real numbers a field, and, along with the order, an ordered field. The real number system is the unique "complete ordered field", in the sense that any other complete ordered field is isomorphic to it. Intuitively, completeness means that there are no 'gaps' in the real numbers. In particular, this property distinguishes the real numbers from other ordered fields (e.g., the rational numbers formula_2) and is critical to the proof of several key properties of functions of the real numbers. The completeness of the reals is often conveniently expressed as the "least upper bound property" (see below).
There are several ways of formalizing the definition of the real numbers. Modern approaches consist of providing a list of axioms, and a proof of the existence of a model for them, which has above properties. Moreover, one may show that any two models are isomorphic, which means that all models have exactly the same properties, and that one may forget how the model is constructed for using real numbers.
Order properties of the real numbers.
The real numbers have various lattice-theoretic properties that are absent in the complex numbers. Also, the real numbers form an ordered field, in which sums and products of positive numbers are also positive. Moreover, the ordering of the real numbers is total, and the real numbers have the least upper bound property: "Every nonempty subset of formula_1 that has an upper bound has a least upper bound that is also a real number." These order-theoretic properties lead to a number of fundamental results in real analysis, such as the monotone convergence theorem, the intermediate value theorem and the mean value theorem.
However, while the results in real analysis are stated for real numbers, many of these results can be generalized to other mathematical objects. In particular, many ideas in functional analysis and operator theory generalize properties of the real numbers – such generalizations include the theories of Riesz spaces and positive operators. Also, mathematicians consider real and imaginary parts of complex sequences, or by pointwise evaluation of operator sequences.
Topological properties of the real numbers.
Many of the theorems of real analysis are consequences of the topological properties of the real number line. The order properties of the real numbers described above are closely related to these topological properties. As a topological space, the real numbers has a "standard topology", which is the order topology induced by order formula_4. Alternatively, by defining the "metric" or "distance function" formula_5 using the absolute value function as the real numbers become the prototypical example of a metric space. The topology induced by metric formula_6 turns out to be identical to the standard topology induced by order formula_4. Theorems like the intermediate value theorem that are essentially topological in nature can often be proved in the more general setting of metric or topological spaces rather than in formula_1 only. Often, such proofs tend to be shorter or simpler compared to classical proofs that apply direct methods.
Sequences.
A sequence is a function whose domain is a countable, totally ordered set. The domain is usually taken to be the natural numbers, although it is occasionally convenient to also consider bidirectional sequences indexed by the set of all integers, including negative indices.
Of interest in real analysis, a real-valued sequence, here indexed by the natural numbers, is a map formula_9. Each formula_10 is referred to as a term (or, less commonly, an element) of the sequence. A sequence is rarely denoted explicitly as a function; instead, by convention, it is almost always notated as if it were an ordered ∞-tuple, with individual terms or a general term enclosed in parentheses:
formula_11
A sequence that tends to a limit (i.e., formula_12 exists) is said to be convergent; otherwise it is divergent. ("See the section on limits and convergence for details.") A real-valued sequence formula_13 is bounded if there exists formula_14 such that formula_15 for all formula_16. A real-valued sequence formula_13 is monotonically increasing or decreasing if
formula_18
or
formula_19
holds, respectively. If either holds, the sequence is said to be monotonic. The monotonicity is strict if the chained inequalities still hold with formula_20 or formula_21 replaced by &lt; or &gt;.
Given a sequence formula_13, another sequence formula_23 is a subsequence of formula_13 if formula_25 for all positive integers formula_26 and formula_27 is a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers.
Limits and convergence.
Roughly speaking, a limit is the value that a function or a sequence "approaches" as the input or index approaches some value. (This value can include the symbols formula_28 when addressing the behavior of a function or sequence as the variable increases or decreases without bound.) The idea of a limit is fundamental to calculus (and mathematical analysis in general) and its formal definition is used in turn to define notions like continuity, derivatives, and integrals. (In fact, the study of limiting behavior has been used as a characteristic that distinguishes calculus and mathematical analysis from other branches of mathematics.)
The concept of limit was informally introduced for functions by Newton and Leibniz, at the end of the 17th century, for building infinitesimal calculus. For sequences, the concept was introduced by Cauchy, and made rigorous, at the end of the 19th century by Bolzano and Weierstrass, who gave the modern ε-δ definition, which follows.
Definition. Let formula_29 be a real-valued function defined on We say that formula_30 tends to formula_31 as formula_32 approaches formula_33, or that the limit of formula_30 as formula_32 approaches formula_33 is formula_31 if, for any formula_38, there exists formula_39 such that for all formula_40, formula_41 implies that formula_42. We write this symbolically as
formula_43 or as formula_44
Intuitively, this definition can be thought of in the following way: We say that formula_45 as formula_46, when, given any positive number formula_47, no matter how small, we can always find a formula_48, such that we can guarantee that formula_30 and formula_31 are less than formula_47 apart, as long as formula_32 (in the domain of formula_29) is a real number that is less than formula_48 away from formula_33 but distinct from formula_33. The purpose of the last stipulation, which corresponds to the condition formula_57 in the definition, is to ensure that formula_58 does not imply anything about the value of formula_59 itself. Actually, formula_33 does not even need to be in the domain of formula_29 in order for formula_62 to exist.
In a slightly different but related context, the concept of a limit applies to the behavior of a sequence formula_13 when formula_64 becomes large.
Definition. Let formula_13 be a real-valued sequence. We say that formula_13 converges to formula_67 if, for any formula_68, there exists a natural number formula_69 such that formula_70 implies that formula_71. We write this symbolically as
formula_72or asformula_73
if formula_13 fails to converge, we say that formula_13 diverges.
Generalizing to a real-valued function of a real variable, a slight modification of this definition (replacement of sequence formula_13 and term formula_77 by function formula_29 and value formula_30 and natural numbers formula_69 and formula_64 by real numbers formula_82 and formula_32, respectively) yields the definition of the limit of formula_30 as formula_32 increases without bound, notated formula_86. Reversing the inequality formula_87 to formula_88 gives the corresponding definition of the limit of formula_30 as formula_32 "decreases" "without bound", 
Sometimes, it is useful to conclude that a sequence converges, even though the value to which it converges is unknown or irrelevant. In these cases, the concept of a Cauchy sequence is useful.
Definition. Let formula_13 be a real-valued sequence. We say that formula_13 is a Cauchy sequence if, for any formula_68, there exists a natural number formula_69 such that formula_95 implies that formula_96.
It can be shown that a real-valued sequence is Cauchy if and only if it is convergent. This property of the real numbers is expressed by saying that the real numbers endowed with the standard metric, formula_97, is a complete metric space. In a general metric space, however, a Cauchy sequence need not converge.
In addition, for real-valued sequences that are monotonic, it can be shown that the sequence is bounded if and only if it is convergent.
Uniform and pointwise convergence for sequences of functions.
In addition to sequences of numbers, one may also speak of "sequences of functions" "on" formula_98, that is, infinite, ordered families of functions formula_99, denoted formula_100, and their convergence properties. However, in the case of sequences of functions, there are two kinds of convergence, known as "pointwise convergence" and "uniform convergence", that need to be distinguished.
Roughly speaking, pointwise convergence of functions formula_101 to a limiting function formula_102, denoted formula_103, simply means that given any formula_40, formula_105 as formula_106. In contrast, uniform convergence is a stronger type of convergence, in the sense that a uniformly convergent sequence of functions also converges pointwise, but not conversely. Uniform convergence requires members of the family of functions, formula_101, to fall within some error formula_68 of formula_29 for "every value of formula_40", whenever formula_70, for some integer formula_69. For a family of functions to uniformly converge, sometimes denoted formula_113, such a value of formula_69 must exist for any formula_38 given, no matter how small. Intuitively, we can visualize this situation by imagining that, for a large enough formula_69, the functions formula_117 are all confined within a 'tube' of width formula_118 about formula_29 (that is, between formula_120 and formula_121) "for every value in their domain" formula_122.
The distinction between pointwise and uniform convergence is important when exchanging the order of two limiting operations (e.g., taking a limit, a derivative, or integral) is desired: in order for the exchange to be well-behaved, many theorems of real analysis call for uniform convergence. For example, a sequence of continuous functions (see below) is guaranteed to converge to a continuous limiting function if the convergence is uniform, while the limiting function may not be continuous if convergence is only pointwise. Karl Weierstrass is generally credited for clearly defining the concept of uniform convergence and fully investigating its implications.
Compactness.
Compactness is a concept from general topology that plays an important role in many of the theorems of real analysis. The property of compactness is a generalization of the notion of a set being "closed" and "bounded". (In the context of real analysis, these notions are equivalent: a set in Euclidean space is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded.) Briefly, a closed set contains all of its boundary points, while a set is bounded if there exists a real number such that the distance between any two points of the set is less than that number. In formula_1, sets that are closed and bounded, and therefore compact, include the empty set, any finite number of points, closed intervals, and their finite unions. However, this list is not exhaustive; for instance, the set formula_124 is a compact set; the Cantor ternary set formula_125 is another example of a compact set. On the other hand, the set formula_126 is not compact because it is bounded but not closed, as the boundary point 0 is not a member of the set. The set formula_127 is also not compact because it is closed but not bounded.
For subsets of the real numbers, there are several equivalent definitions of compactness.
Definition. A set formula_128 is compact if it is closed and bounded.
This definition also holds for Euclidean space of any finite dimension, formula_129, but it is not valid for metric spaces in general. The equivalence of the definition with the definition of compactness based on subcovers, given later in this section, is known as the Heine-Borel theorem.
A more general definition that applies to all metric spaces uses the notion of a subsequence (see above).
Definition. A set formula_122 in a metric space is compact if every sequence in formula_122 has a convergent subsequence.
This particular property is known as "subsequential compactness". In formula_1, a set is subsequentially compact if and only if it is closed and bounded, making this definition equivalent to the one given above. Subsequential compactness is equivalent to the definition of compactness based on subcovers for metric spaces, but not for topological spaces in general.
The most general definition of compactness relies on the notion of "open covers" and "subcovers", which is applicable to topological spaces (and thus to metric spaces and formula_1 as special cases). In brief, a collection of open sets formula_134 is said to be an "open cover" of set formula_135 if the union of these sets is a superset of formula_135. This open cover is said to have a "finite subcover" if a finite subcollection of the formula_134 could be found that also covers formula_135.
Definition. A set formula_135 in a topological space is compact if every open cover of formula_135 has a finite subcover.
Compact sets are well-behaved with respect to properties like convergence and continuity. For instance, any Cauchy sequence in a compact metric space is convergent. As another example, the image of a compact metric space under a continuous map is also compact.
Continuity.
A function from the set of real numbers to the real numbers can be represented by a graph in the Cartesian plane; such a function is continuous if, roughly speaking, the graph is a single unbroken curve with no "holes" or "jumps".
There are several ways to make this intuition mathematically rigorous. Several definitions of varying levels of generality can be given. In cases where two or more definitions are applicable, they are readily shown to be equivalent to one another, so the most convenient definition can be used to determine whether a given function is continuous or not. In the first definition given below, formula_141 is a function defined on a non-degenerate interval formula_142 of the set of real numbers as its domain. Some possibilities include formula_143, the whole set of real numbers, an open interval formula_144 or a closed interval formula_145 Here, formula_67 and formula_147 are distinct real numbers, and we exclude the case of formula_142 being empty or consisting of only one point, in particular.
Definition. If formula_149 is a non-degenerate interval, we say that formula_150 is continuous at formula_151 if formula_152. We say that formula_29 is a continuous map if formula_29 is continuous at every formula_151.
In contrast to the requirements for formula_29 to have a limit at a point formula_157, which do not constrain the behavior of formula_29 at formula_157 itself, the following two conditions, in addition to the existence of formula_160, must also hold in order for formula_29 to be continuous at formula_157: (i) formula_29 must be defined at formula_157, i.e., formula_157 is in the domain of formula_29; "and" (ii) formula_167 as formula_168. The definition above actually applies to any domain formula_122 that does not contain an isolated point, or equivalently, formula_122 where every formula_171 is a limit point of formula_122. A more general definition applying to formula_173 with a general domain formula_174 is the following:
Definition. If formula_135 is an arbitrary subset of formula_1, we say that formula_173 is continuous at formula_178 if, for any formula_38, there exists formula_39 such that for all formula_181, formula_182 implies that formula_183. We say that formula_29 is a continuous map if formula_29 is continuous at every formula_178.
A consequence of this definition is that formula_29 is "trivially continuous at any isolated point" formula_178. This somewhat unintuitive treatment of isolated points is necessary to ensure that our definition of continuity for functions on the real line is consistent with the most general definition of continuity for maps between topological spaces (which includes metric spaces and formula_1 in particular as special cases). This definition, which extends beyond the scope of our discussion of real analysis, is given below for completeness.
Definition. If formula_135 and formula_191 are topological spaces, we say that formula_192 is continuous at formula_178 if formula_194 is a neighborhood of formula_157 in formula_135 for every neighborhood formula_197 of formula_198 in formula_191. We say that formula_29 is a continuous map if formula_201 is open in formula_135 for every formula_203 open in formula_191.
Uniform continuity.
Definition. If formula_135 is a subset of the real numbers, we say a function formula_173 is uniformly continuous on formula_135 if, for any formula_68, there exists a formula_39 such that for all formula_213, formula_214 implies that formula_215.
Explicitly, when a function is uniformly continuous on formula_135, the choice of formula_48 needed to fulfill the definition must work for "all of" formula_135 for a given formula_47. In contrast, when a function is continuous at every point formula_178 (or said to be continuous on formula_135), the choice of formula_48 may depend on both formula_47 "and" formula_157. In contrast to simple continuity, uniform continuity is a property of a function that only makes sense with a specified domain; to speak of uniform continuity at a single point formula_157 is meaningless.
On a compact set, it is easily shown that all continuous functions are uniformly continuous. If formula_122 is a bounded noncompact subset of formula_1, then there exists formula_102 that is continuous but not uniformly continuous. As a simple example, consider formula_229 defined by formula_230. By choosing points close to 0, we can always make formula_231 for any single choice of formula_39, for a given formula_68.
Absolute continuity.
Definition. Let formula_234 be an interval on the real line. A function formula_235 is said to be absolutely continuous on formula_142 if for every positive number formula_47, there is a positive number formula_48 such that whenever a finite sequence of pairwise disjoint sub-intervals formula_239 of formula_142 satisfies
then
Absolutely continuous functions are continuous: consider the case "n" = 1 in this definition. The collection of all absolutely continuous functions on "I" is denoted AC("I"). Absolute continuity is a fundamental concept in the Lebesgue theory of integration, allowing the formulation of a generalized version of the fundamental theorem of calculus that applies to the Lebesgue integral.
Differentiation.
The notion of the "derivative" of a function or "differentiability" originates from the concept of approximating a function near a given point using the "best" linear approximation. This approximation, if it exists, is unique and is given by the line that is tangent to the function at the given point formula_67, and the slope of the line is the derivative of the function at formula_67.
A function formula_245 is differentiable at formula_67 if the limit
exists. This limit is known as the derivative of formula_29 at formula_67, and the function formula_250, possibly defined on only a subset of formula_1, is the derivative (or derivative function) of formula_29. If the derivative exists everywhere, the function is said to be differentiable.
As a simple consequence of the definition, formula_29 is continuous at formula_67 if it is differentiable there. Differentiability is therefore a stronger regularity condition (condition describing the "smoothness" of a function) than continuity, and it is possible for a function to be continuous on the entire real line but not differentiable anywhere (see Weierstrass's nowhere differentiable continuous function). It is possible to discuss the existence of higher-order derivatives as well, by finding the derivative of a derivative function, and so on.
One can classify functions by their differentiability class. The class formula_255 (sometimes formula_256 to indicate the interval of applicability) consists of all continuous functions. The class formula_257 consists of all differentiable functions whose derivative is continuous; such functions are called continuously differentiable. Thus, a formula_257 function is exactly a function whose derivative exists and is of class formula_255. In general, the classes "formula_260" can be defined recursively by declaring formula_255 to be the set of all continuous functions and declaring "formula_260" for any positive integer formula_26 to be the set of all differentiable functions whose derivative is in formula_264. In particular, "formula_260" is contained in formula_264 for every formula_26, and there are examples to show that this containment is strict. Class formula_268 is the intersection of the sets "formula_260" as "formula_26" varies over the non-negative integers, and the members of this class are known as the smooth functions. Class formula_271 consists of all analytic functions, and is strictly contained in formula_268 (see bump function for a smooth function that is not analytic).
Series.
A series formalizes the imprecise notion of taking the sum of an endless sequence of numbers. The idea that taking the sum of an "infinite" number of terms can lead to a finite result was counterintuitive to the ancient Greeks and led to the formulation of a number of paradoxes by Zeno and other philosophers. The modern notion of assigning a value to a series avoids dealing with the ill-defined notion of adding an "infinite" number of terms. Instead, the finite sum of the first formula_64 terms of the sequence, known as a partial sum, is considered, and the concept of a limit is applied to the sequence of partial sums as formula_64 grows without bound. The series is assigned the value of this limit, if it exists.
Given an (infinite) sequence formula_13, we can define an associated series as the formal mathematical object sometimes simply written as formula_276. The partial sums of a series formula_276 are the numbers formula_278. A series formula_276 is said to be convergent if the sequence consisting of its partial sums, formula_280, is convergent; otherwise it is divergent. The sum of a convergent series is defined as the number 
The word "sum" is used here in a metaphorical sense as a shorthand for taking the limit of a sequence of partial sums and should not be interpreted as simply "adding" an infinite number of terms. For instance, in contrast to the behavior of finite sums, rearranging the terms of an infinite series may result in convergence to a different number (see the article on the "Riemann rearrangement theorem" for further discussion).
An example of a convergent series is a geometric series which forms the basis of one of Zeno's famous paradoxes:
In contrast, the harmonic series has been known since the Middle Ages to be a divergent series:
A series formula_276 is said to converge absolutely if formula_285 is convergent. A convergent series formula_276 for which formula_285 diverges is said to converge non-absolutely. It is easily shown that absolute convergence of a series implies its convergence. On the other hand, an example of a series that converges non-absolutely is
Taylor series.
The Taylor series of a real or complex-valued function "ƒ"("x") that is infinitely differentiable at a real or complex number "a" is the power series
which can be written in the more compact sigma notation as
where "n"! denotes the factorial of "n" and "ƒ" ("n")("a") denotes the "n"th derivative of "ƒ" evaluated at the point "a". The derivative of order zero "ƒ" is defined to be "ƒ" itself and and 0! are both defined to be 1. In the case that , the series is also called a Maclaurin series.
A Taylor series of "f" about point "a" may diverge, converge at only the point "a", converge for all "x" such that formula_291 (the largest such "R" for which convergence is guaranteed is called the "radius of convergence"), or converge on the entire real line. Even a converging Taylor series may converge to a value different from the value of the function at that point. If the Taylor series at a point has a nonzero radius of convergence, and sums to the function in the disc of convergence, then the function is analytic. The analytic functions have many fundamental properties. In particular, an analytic function of a real variable extends naturally to a function of a complex variable. It is in this way that the exponential function, the logarithm, the trigonometric functions and their inverses are extended to functions of a complex variable.
Fourier series.
Fourier series decomposes periodic functions or periodic signals into the sum of a (possibly infinite) set of simple oscillating functions, namely sines and cosines (or complex exponentials). The study of Fourier series typically occurs and is handled within the branch mathematics &gt; mathematical analysis &gt; Fourier analysis.
Integration.
Integration is a formalization of the problem of finding the area bound by a curve and the related problems of determining the length of a curve or volume enclosed by a surface. The basic strategy to solving problems of this type was known to the ancient Greeks and Chinese, and was known as the "method of exhaustion". Generally speaking, the desired area is bounded from above and below, respectively, by increasingly accurate circumscribing and inscribing polygonal approximations whose exact areas can be computed. By considering approximations consisting of a larger and larger ("infinite") number of smaller and smaller ("infinitesimal") pieces, the area bound by the curve can be deduced, as the upper and lower bounds defined by the approximations converge around a common value.
The spirit of this basic strategy can easily be seen in the definition of the Riemann integral, in which the integral is said to exist if upper and lower Riemann (or Darboux) sums converge to a common value as thinner and thinner rectangular slices ("refinements") are considered. Though the machinery used to define it is much more elaborate compared to the Riemann integral, the Lebesgue integral was defined with similar basic ideas in mind. Compared to the Riemann integral, the more sophisticated Lebesgue integral allows area (or length, volume, etc.; termed a "measure" in general) to be defined and computed for much more complicated and irregular subsets of Euclidean space, although there still exist "non-measurable" subsets for which an area cannot be assigned.
Riemann integration.
The Riemann integral is defined in terms of Riemann sums of functions with respect to tagged partitions of an interval. Let formula_292 be a closed interval of the real line; then a tagged partition formula_293 of formula_292 is a finite sequence
This partitions the interval formula_292 into formula_64 sub-intervals formula_298 indexed by formula_299, each of which is "tagged" with a distinguished point formula_300. For a function formula_29 bounded on formula_292, we define the Riemann sum of formula_29 with respect to tagged partition formula_293 as
where formula_306 is the width of sub-interval formula_307. Thus, each term of the sum is the area of a rectangle with height equal to the function value at the distinguished point of the given sub-interval, and width the same as the sub-interval width. The mesh of such a tagged partition is the width of the largest sub-interval formed by the partition, formula_308. We say that the Riemann integral of formula_29 on formula_292 is formula_311 if for any formula_38 there exists formula_39 such that, for any tagged partition formula_293 with mesh formula_315, we have
This is sometimes denoted formula_317. When the chosen tags give the maximum (respectively, minimum) value of each interval, the Riemann sum is known as the upper (respectively, lower) Darboux sum. A function is Darboux integrable if the upper and lower Darboux sums can be made to be arbitrarily close to each other for a sufficiently small mesh. Although this definition gives the Darboux integral the appearance of being a special case of the Riemann integral, they are, in fact, equivalent, in the sense that a function is Darboux integrable if and only if it is Riemann integrable, and the values of the integrals are equal. In fact, calculus and real analysis textbooks often conflate the two, introducing the definition of the Darboux integral as that of the Riemann integral, due to the slightly easier to apply definition of the former.
The fundamental theorem of calculus asserts that integration and differentiation are inverse operations in a certain sense.
Lebesgue integration and measure.
Lebesgue integration is a mathematical construction that extends the integral to a larger class of functions; it also extends the domains on which these functions can be defined. The concept of a measure, an abstraction of length, area, or volume, is central to Lebesgue integral probability theory.
Distributions.
Distributions (or generalized functions) are objects that generalize functions. Distributions make it possible to differentiate functions whose derivatives do not exist in the classical sense. In particular, any locally integrable function has a distributional derivative.
Relation to complex analysis.
Real analysis is an area of analysis that studies concepts such as sequences and their limits, continuity, differentiation, integration and sequences of functions. By definition, real analysis focuses on the real numbers, often including positive and negative infinity to form the extended real line. Real analysis is closely related to complex analysis, which studies broadly the same properties of complex numbers. In complex analysis, it is natural to define differentiation via holomorphic functions, which have a number of useful properties, such as repeated differentiability, expressibility as power series, and satisfying the Cauchy integral formula.
In real analysis, it is usually more natural to consider differentiable, smooth, or harmonic functions, which are more widely applicable, but may lack some more powerful properties of holomorphic functions. However, results such as the fundamental theorem of algebra are simpler when expressed in terms of complex numbers.
Techniques from the theory of analytic functions of a complex variable are often used in real analysis – such as evaluation of real integrals by residue calculus.
Important results.
Important results include the Bolzano–Weierstrass and Heine–Borel theorems, the intermediate value theorem and mean value theorem, Taylor's theorem, the fundamental theorem of calculus, the Arzelà-Ascoli theorem, the Stone-Weierstrass theorem, Fatou's lemma, and the monotone convergence and dominated convergence theorems.
Generalizations and related areas of mathematics.
Various ideas from real analysis can be generalized from the real line to broader or more abstract contexts. These generalizations link real analysis to other disciplines and subdisciplines. For instance, generalization of ideas like continuous functions and compactness from real analysis to metric spaces and topological spaces connects real analysis to the field of general topology, while generalization of finite-dimensional Euclidean spaces to infinite-dimensional analogs led to the concepts of Banach spaces and Hilbert spaces and, more generally to functional analysis. Georg Cantor's investigation of sets and sequence of real numbers, mappings between them, and the foundational issues of real analysis gave birth to naive set theory. The study of issues of convergence for sequences of functions eventually gave rise to Fourier analysis as a subdiscipline of mathematical analysis. Investigation of the consequences of generalizing differentiability from functions of a real variable to ones of a complex variable gave rise to the concept of holomorphic functions and the inception of complex analysis as another distinct subdiscipline of analysis. On the other hand, the generalization of integration from the Riemann sense to that of Lebesgue led to the formulation of the concept of abstract measure spaces, a fundamental concept in measure theory. Finally, the generalization of integration from the real line to curves and surfaces in higher dimensional space brought about the study of vector calculus, whose further generalization and formalization played an important role in the evolution of the concepts of differential forms and smooth (differentiable) manifolds in differential geometry and other closely related areas of geometry and topology.

