
Roger Angell (born September 19, 1920) is an American essayist known for his writing on sports, especially baseball. He has been a regular contributor to "The New Yorker" and was its chief fiction editor for many years. He has written numerous works of fiction, non-fiction, and criticism, and for many years wrote an annual Christmas poem for "The New Yorker".
He received a number of awards for his writing, including the George Polk Award for Commentary in 1980, the "Kenyon Review" Award for Literary Achievement in 2005 along with Umberto Eco, and the inaugural PEN/ESPN Lifetime Achievement Award for Literary Sports Writing in 2011.
He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2007 and is a long-time ex-officio member of the council of the Authors Guild.
Angell was inducted into the Baseball Reliquary's Shrine of the Eternals in 2010.
He was named the 2014 recipient of the J. G. Taylor Spink Award by the Baseball Writers' Association of America on December 10, 2013.
Early life and education.
Angell is the son of Katharine Sergeant Angell White, "The New Yorker"’s first fiction editor, and the stepson of renowned essayist E. B. White, but was raised for the most part by his father, Ernest Angell, an attorney who became head of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Angell is a 1938 graduate of the Pomfret School and attended Harvard University. He served in the United States Army Air Forces during World War II.
Career.
Angell's earliest published works were pieces of short fiction and personal narratives. Several of these pieces were collected in "The Stone Arbor and Other Stories" (1960) and "A Day in the Life of Roger Angell" (1970).
In 1948, Angell was employed at "Holiday Magazine", a travel magazine that featured literary writers.
He first contributed to "The New Yorker" in March 1944 and continued to contribute into 2020.
He first wrote professionally about baseball in 1962, when William Shawn, editor of "The New Yorker", had him travel to Florida to write about spring training. His first two baseball collections were "The Summer Game" (1972) and "Five Seasons: A Baseball Companion" (1977).
Angell has been called the "Poet Laureate of baseball" but dislikes the term. In a review of "Once More Around the Park" for the "Journal of Sport History", Richard C. Crepeau wrote that "Gone for Good", Angell's essay on the career of Steve Blass, "may be the best piece that anyone has ever written on baseball or any other sport". Angell contributed commentary to the Ken Burns series "Baseball", in 1994.
Personal life.
Angell has three children: Callie, Alice, and John Henry. He had Alice and Callie with his first wife Evelyn, and John Henry with Carol. Callie Angell, who was an authority on the films of Andy Warhol, committed suicide on May 5, 2010, in Manhattan, where she worked as a curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art; she was 62. In a 2014 essay, Angell mentioned her death – "the oceanic force and mystery of that event" – and his struggle to comprehend that "a beautiful daughter of mine, my oldest child, had ended her life." Alice Angell lived in Portland, Maine and died from cancer on February 2, 2019, and John Henry Angell lives in Portland, Oregon.
His second wife, Carol Rogge Angell, to whom he was married for 48 years, died on April 10, 2012, of metastatic breast cancer at the age of 73. In 2014, he married Margaret Moorman, a writer and teacher, as noted in the Ellsworth American newspaper. On September 19, 2020, Angell turned 100.
Bibliography.
In 2019, University of Nebraska Press published "No Place I Would Rather Be: Roger Angell and a Life in Baseball Writing", a book about Angell's career written by Joe Bonomo.

