
Russian roulette (, "russkaya ruletka") is a lethal game of chance in which a player places a single round in a revolver, spins the cylinder, places the muzzle against his or her head, and pulls the trigger. If the loaded chamber aligns with the barrel, the weapon will fire killing the player.
"Russian" refers to the supposed country of origin, and "roulette" to the element of risk-taking and the spinning of the revolver's cylinder, similar to a roulette wheel.
Origin.
According to Andrew Clarke, the first trace of Russian roulette can be found in the story "The Fatalist" of 1840, part of the collection "A Hero of Our Time" by Mikhail Lermontov, a Russian poet and writer. In the story the protagonist, Grigory Alexandrovich Pechorin, says there is no predestination and proposes a bet emptying about twenty gold pieces onto the table. A lieutenant of the dragoons of the tsar, of Serbian origin, Vulič, with a passion for gambling, accepts the challenge and randomly takes one of the various-caliber pistols from its nail, cocks it and pours powder on the shelf. Nobody knows if the pistol is loaded or not. Vulič asks: "Gentlemen! Who will pay 20 gold pieces for me?", putting the muzzle of the pistol to his forehead. Then he asks Gregory to throw a card in the air and when this card touches the ground, he shoots. Nothing happens, because the blow fails, but when Vulič cocks the pistol again, and aims it at the service cap hanging over the window, a shot rings out and smoke fills the room.
Etymology.
The term "Russian roulette" was possibly first used in a 1937 short story of the same name by Georges Surdez:
Probability.
The game is commonly associated with six-shot revolvers. In this case, mathematically, the average number of consecutive pulls of the trigger before the gun discharges is 3.5. After a single spin, the probability of it firing is , followed by on the second pull, on the third pull and so on, until if it fails to fire 5 times, the probability is (=1) on the final pull. If the cylinder is re-spun after each trigger pull, the probability of firing remains 1 in 6 on each occasion, and the probability of it having fired after six pulls is formula_1, or about 66.5%.
Drinking games.
There is a drinking game based on Russian roulette. The game involves six shot glasses filled by a non-player. Five are filled with water, the sixth with vodka. Among some groups, low quality vodka is preferred as it makes the glass representing the filled chamber less desirable. The glasses are arranged in a circle, and players take turns choosing a glass to take a shot from at random.
There is also a game called "Beer Hunter" (titled after the Russian roulette scenes in the film "The Deer Hunter"). In this game, six cans of beer are placed between the participants. One can is vigorously shaken, and the cans are scrambled. The participants take turns opening the cans of beer right under their noses; the person who opens the shaken can (and sprays beer up their nose) is deemed the loser.

