
A screwdriver is a popular alcoholic highball drink made with orange juice and vodka. While the basic drink is simply the two ingredients, there are many variations. Many of the variations have different names in different parts of the world.
History.
The screwdriver is mentioned in a 1944 "Newsweek" article: "A Screwdriver—a drink compounded of vodka and orange juice and supposedly invented by interned American fliers"; and in a 1949 "Time" article: "the latest Yankee concoction of vodka and orange juice, called a 'screwdriver.
Variations.
A screwdriver with two parts of sloe gin and filled with orange juice is a "Slow (Sloe) Screw".
A screwdriver with two parts of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, and filled with orange juice is a "Slow Comfortable Screw".
A screwdriver with one part of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, one part Galliano, and filled with orange juice is a "Slow Comfortable Screw Up Against The Wall".
A screwdriver with one part of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, one part Galliano, one part tequila, and filled with orange juice is a "Slow Comfortable Screw Up Against The Wall Mexican Style".
A screwdriver with one part of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, one part Galliano, one part peach schnapps, and filled with orange juice is a "Slow Comfortable Screw Up Against a Fuzzy Wall".
A screwdriver with one part of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, one part Galliano, one part peach schnapps, one part sparkling rosé, and filled with orange juice is a "Slow Comfortable Screw Up Against a Fuzzy Pink Wall".
A screwdriver with two parts vodka, four parts orange juice, and one part Galliano is a Harvey Wallbanger.
A screwdriver with equal parts vanilla vodka and blue Curaçao topped with lemon-lime soda is a "Sonic Screwdriver". This cocktail is named after the sonic screwdriver from science fiction TV show "Doctor Who". The blue color of the cocktail resembles the blue parts of the prop from the show.
A screwdriver with one part Fireball Cinnamon Whisky and four parts orange juice is a "Burning Screwdriver".
A shot of vodka with a slice of orange is a "Cordless Screwdriver".
A screwdriver with half orange juice and half 7-Up as mixer is a "Screwup".
A "Virgin Screwdriver" is a mocktail (non-alcoholic version), usually made with orange juice and tonic water.
A screwdriver with apple juice instead of orange juice is an "Anita Bryant Cocktail". Bryant was an American singer and spokeswoman for the Florida Citrus Commission during the 1960s and 1970s. Starting in 1977, she became an anti-gay rights activist.
Because Bryant promoted orange juice, the gay community retaliated by boycotting it. Gay bars across North America stopped serving screwdrivers and invented this cocktail to replace it. The sales and proceeds of the cocktail went to gay rights activists and helped fund their work against Bryant. The campaign was ultimately successful as Bryant's activism damaged her musical and business career. Her contract with the Florida Citrus Commission was left to expire in 1980 after they stated she was "worn out" as a spokesperson. After that, gay bars started selling screwdrivers again.
A screwdriver containing vodka and Faygo is a Downriver Screwdriver.
A screwdriver with two parts gin, four parts Orange Juice is a Left-Handed Screwdriver.

