
Strangers in Paradise is a long-running creator owned comic book series, written and drawn by Terry Moore. Principally the story of a love triangle between two women and one man, "Strangers in Paradise" is a slice-of-life dramedy that later expanded to take in the crime and thriller genres. Moore has remained the sole creator throughout the run, with the exception of a superhero dream sequence drawn by Jim Lee that opens Volume 3, Issue #1. The artwork was originally presented in Moore's distinctive black-and-white style, aside from two full colour dream sequences including the aforementioned superhero panels.
The majority of the run has been published under Moore's creator owned imprint, "Abstract Studio". The first issue was published January 1, 1993, and the original series reached its planned conclusion in 2007 with Issue #90 of Volume 3.
In 2012, Moore announced he was working on a Strangers in Paradise novel at Comic-Con International.
In 2018, Moore officially revived the series as "Strangers in Paradise XXV" for the 25th anniversary.
Origins and publication history.
Terry Moore stated that "I started out wanting to do a newspaper strip, and tried one idea after another before I realised I hated the gag-a-day life and really wanted to try a story instead." The story he chose to tell turned out to be "Strangers in Paradise", or "this story about 2 girls and a guy who gets to know them" (from Moore's introduction to "The Collected Strangers in Paradise, Volume One"), which used characters he had developed during his time on the gag-a-day circuit. For example, Katchoo appears as a "happy-go-lucky wood nymph" in an early strip by Moore about an enchanted forest. These strips were collected into two trade paperbacks, but they did not include three issues. Because of this, the entire run was later published in one large paperback edition entitled "The Complete Paradise Too". This volume can be considered the true origin of Katchoo, Francine and the "Strangers in Paradise" universe.
"SiP", as it is commonly known, began as a three-issue mini-series published by Antarctic Press in 1993, which focused entirely on the relationship between the three main characters and Francine's unfaithful boyfriend. This is now known as "Volume 1.” Thirteen issues were published under Moore's own "Abstract Studio" imprint, and these make up "Volume 2.” This is where the "thriller" plot was introduced. The series moved to Image Comics' Homage imprint for the start of "Volume 3,” but after eight issues moved back to Abstract Studio, where it continued with the same numbering. Volume 3 concluded at issue #90, released June 6, 2007.
Moore revived the series as "Strangers in Paradise XXV" in 2018 for the 25th anniversary. The new miniseries included characters and elements from Moore's other works, "Echo", "Rachel Rising", and "Motor Girl".
Plot.
The story primarily concerns the difficult relationship between two women, Helen Francine Peters (referred to as Francine throughout the series) and Katina Marie ("Katchoo") Choovanski, and their friend David Qin. Francine considers Katchoo her best friend; Katchoo is in love with Francine. David is in love with Katchoo (a relationship which Katchoo herself is deeply conflicted over).
The love triangle (which later expands into a love rectangle with the introduction of Casey Bullock, who marries Francine's ex-boyfriend Freddie Femur and later divorces him, in order to pursue both David and Katchoo) alternates with the mystery and intrigue regarding Katchoo's past as an underage lesbian hooker and the Parker Crime Syndicate. Run by David's lesbian sister Darcy, the "Parker Girls" work for the shadowy 'Big Six' organization, an international crime syndicate with influence over the world of politics. "Parker Girls" are highly trained women used by organized crime to control, manipulate, spy upon, and ultimately kill men and women in positions of power and authority, for the Big Six.
Awards.
The series received the Eisner Award for Best Serialized Story in 1996 for "I Dream of You" as well as the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Award for Best Comic Book in 2003. It also won the GLAAD Award for Best Comic Book in 2001.
Collected editions.
"Strangers in Paradise" has been collected into a series of full-size trade paperbacks, hardback collections, and smaller format paperback collections. These reprints collect the issues into different sets.
The full-size paperback collections to date are:
The hardback collections to date are:
The "pocket book" collections to date are:
Other books to date are:
Merchandise.
Two limited edition statuettes of Katchoo were produced by Clayburn Moore as the first in a planned series of three statues based around the series. In the first, she is standing in a skimpy black dress, and in the second she is reclining in a bath wearing her leather jacket and holding a drink and a gun.
In 2009, Shocker Toys released a Katchoo figure as part of the first series of its "Indie Spotlight" line.
In 1996, a series of trading cards was released by Comic Images, consisting of a 90-card base set plus extra collector's cards, such as the 500 'autograph cards' that featured Terry Moore's signature and information on the creation of "SiP". These extra cards were inserted randomly into packs. Also produced was a matching "SiP" binder, which came with 12 9-pocket sleeves to hold the cards.
Advertised on the official "SiP" website are character pin badges representing Francine, Katchoo and David. There is also a black tote bag featuring the "Strangers in Paradise" logo and a tumbler decorated with colour panels from the series, in addition to a postcard set and two T-shirts, although several of these items are listed as 'sold out', and are hard to come by elsewhere.
Film adaptation.
On September 13, 2017, Angela Robinson and Moore announced they were developing the film adaptation. In November 2017, Moore was working on a script for it. IMG Global Media is backing the project and Robinson will direct.

