
Shannon Elizabeth Fadal (born ) is an American actress, poker player and former fashion model. Elizabeth has appeared in comedy films such as "American Pie", "Scary Movie" and "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back". She has also appeared in horror films such as "Jack Frost", "Thirteen Ghosts", "Cursed", and "Night of the Demons". She was described as a sex symbol for her role in the 1999 comedy film "American Pie". She also had a cameo in the film "Love Actually" and in "Catch a Christmas Star" in which she sings for the first time on camera.
She currently lives in Cape Town, South Africa and runs the non-profit animal rescue organization she co-created in 2001, Animal Avengers.
Early life.
Elizabeth was born in Houston, Texas, to a father of Lebanese-Syrian origin, and to a mother of German, English and Irish ancestry. She was raised in Waco, Texas, from 3rd grade through high school; Elizabeth graduated from Waco High School in 1991. In high school, she was a member of the tennis team and at one point considered a professional tennis career. Elizabeth worked as a model for Ford &amp; Elite models before she began a career in film.
Career.
Acting.
Elizabeth appeared in several films and television shows before being cast in 1999's "American Pie" in the role of Nadia. It was a major box office success. Elizabeth subsequently appeared in several Hollywood films, including "Scary Movie", "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back", and "Tomcats". Elizabeth starred in the UPN series "Cuts" until the show was canceled in May 2006. "Cuts" and its parent show, "One on One", were two of the many shows not to be picked up by The CW. Elizabeth recurred in "That '70s Show" for a number of episodes.
In 2000 and 2003, she was featured in "Maxim". In June 2008 she was "Maxims cover girl. She provided the likeness and voice for Serena St. Germaine in the 2004 video game '. Elizabeth was one of the celebrities on an episode of NBC's "Thank God You're Here" along with Tom Green, Chelsea Handler, and George Takei. Elizabeth was among the cast of the sixth season of "Dancing with the Stars", partnered with Derek Hough. Elizabeth was the seventh star eliminated from the competition. Elizabeth was the host of the comedy/burlesque series "Live Nude Comedy" in 2009. Elizabeth also featured in Chris Brown's "Next to You" music video as Brown's girlfriend in 2011.
In 2019, Kevin Smith confirmed she will reprise her role as Justice in "Jay and Silent Bob Reboot."
Poker.
In 2006, Elizabeth described poker as her second career and was called "one of the leading celebrity poker players." At that time, she visited the Las Vegas Valley up to three times each month to participate in poker games with top players. Elizabeth does not appear to have been as active a poker player since scoring 12 tournament cashes from 2006 through 2010 – she has only one tournament cash (in 2013) thereafter.
Elizabeth played in the Main Event of the 2005 World Series of Poker under the guidance of Daniel Negreanu, and won a special tournament celebrating the opening of a new poker room at Caesars Palace hotel in January 2006, beating out 83 celebrities and poker professionals to win $55,000. She also cashed four times in the World Series of Poker in 2006 and 2007, but again busted out of the Main Event early. In 2007, she advanced to the semi-finals of the NBC National Heads-Up Poker Championship in a field consisting of the top poker professionals before losing to eventual champion Paul Wasicka.
Personal life.
After the September 11 attacks, Elizabeth recorded a public service announcement in which she said, "I'm half Arabic, but I am 100 percent American. What is going on affects me the same as everyone else."
Elizabeth was married to actor Joseph D. Reitman from 2002 to 2005.
She is an environmentalist and vegan. She is a cousin of New York-based television host and relationship coach Tamsen Fadal.
Charity work.
Animal Avengers, a non-profit animal rescue organization founded by Elizabeth and her then-husband Reitman, is dedicated to rescuing and finding a home for homeless pets, reducing pet overpopulation, promoting responsible pet guardianship and preventing animal cruelty. Among the many fundraising events, Team Bodog raised over $50,000 for Animal Avengers in a celebrity poker night on October 8, 2005. The event was hosted by noted tournament director Matt Savage. In 2016, she began participating in numerous other Bodog-sponsored charity events as well. The organization, based in Brazil, lead 3D printing of prosthetic body parts for animals, including a beak for goose Victoria.
Elizabeth has served as the spokesperson for Farm Sanctuary's Adopt a Turkey program, urging people to adopt a turkey instead of eating one for Thanksgiving.
Elizabeth uses social media, particularly Instagram posts, to raise awareness about rhino poaching at the Poached Rhino fundraiser.

