
SNAFU is an acronym that is widely used to stand for the sarcastic expression Situation Normal: All Fucked Up. It is a well-known example of military acronym slang; however the original military acronym stood for "Status Nominal: All Fucked Up". It is sometimes bowdlerized to "all fouled up" or similar. It means that the situation is bad, but that this is a normal state of affairs. The acronym is believed to have originated in the United States Marine Corps during World War II.
In modern usage, "SNAFU" is sometimes used as an interjection. "SNAFU" also sometimes refers to a bad situation, mistake, or cause of trouble. It is more commonly used in modern vernacular to describe running into an error or problem that is large and unexpected. For example, in 2005, "The New York Times" published an article titled "Hospital Staff Cutback Blamed for Test Result Snafu".
Origin.
"SNAFU" was first recorded in "American Notes and Queries" in their September 1941 issue. "Time" magazine used the term in their June 16, 1942, issue: "Last week U.S. citizens knew that gasoline rationing and rubber requisitioning were snafu." Most reference works, including the "Random House Unabridged Dictionary", supply an origin date of 1940–1944, generally attributing it to the U.S. Army. Rick Atkinson ascribes the origin of "SNAFU", "FUBAR", and a bevy of other terms to cynical GIs ridiculing the Army's penchant for acronyms.
The attribution of "SNAFU" to the American military is not universally accepted: it has also been attributed to the British, although the "Oxford English Dictionary" gives its origin and first recorded use as U.S. military slang.
In a wider study of military slang, Elkin noted in 1946 that there "are a few acceptable substitutes such as 'screw up' or 'mess up,' but these do not have the emphasis value of the obscene equivalent." He considered the expression to be "a caricature of Army direction. The soldier resignedly accepts his own less responsible position and expresses his cynicism at the inefficiency of Army authority." He also noted that "the expression […] is coming into general civilian use."
Similar acronyms.
SUSFU.
SUSFU is an acronym for Situation unchanged: still fucked up", but can also be bowdlerized—just like "SNAFU"—to Situation unchanged: still fouled up" or similar. It is used in a military context, was first recorded in the "American Notes and Queries" in their September 1941 issue.

