
Tod Browning (born Charles Albert Browning Jr.; July 12, 1880 – October 6, 1962) was an American film director, film actor, screenwriter and vaudeville performer. Browning's career spanned the silent film and sound film eras. Best known as the director of "Dracula" (1931), "Freaks" (1932), and silent film collaborations with Lon Chaney and Priscilla Dean, Browning directed many movies in a wide range of genres, between 1915 and 1939.
Early life.
Tod Browning was born Charles Albert Browning, Jr., in Louisville, Kentucky, the second son of Charles Albert and Lydia Browning. Charles Albert Sr., “a bricklayer, carpenter and machinist” provided his family with a middle-class and Baptist household. Browning’s uncle, the baseball star Pete “Louisville Slugger" Browning saw his sobriquet conferred on the iconic baseball bat.
As a child, Browning was fascinated by circus and carnival life. At the age of 16, and before finishing high school, he ran away from his well-to-do family to join a traveling circus.
Initially hired as a roustabout, he soon began serving as a “spieler” (a barker at sideshows) and by 1901, at the age of 21, was performing song and dance routines for Ohio and Mississippi riverboat entertainment, as well as acting as a contortionist for the Manhattan Fair and Carnival Company. Browning developed a live burial act in which he was billed as "The Living Hypnotic Corpse", and performed as a clown with the renowned Ringling Brothers circus. He would later draw on these early experiences to inform his cinematic inventions.
In 1906, the 26-year-old Browning was briefly married to Amy Louis Stevens in Louisville. Adopting the professional name "Tod" Browning ("tod" is the German word for death), Browning abandoned his wife and became a vaudevillian, touring extensively as both a magician's assistant and a blackface comedian in an act called "The Lizard and the Coon" with comedian Roy C. Jones. He appeared in a Mutt and Jeff sketch in the 1912 burlesque revue "The World of Mirth" with comedian Charles Murray.
In 1909, after 13 years performing in carnivals and vaudeville circuits, Browning, age 29, transitioned to film acting. 
Film Actor: 1909-1913.
Browning’s work as a comedic film actor began in 1909 when he performed with director and screenwriter Edward Dillon in film shorts. In all, Browning was cast in over 50 of these one- or two-reeler slapstick productions. Film historian Boris Henry observes that “Browning’s experience as a slapstick actor [became] incorporated into his career as a filmmaker.” Dillon later provided many of the screenplays for the early films that Browning would direct. A number of actors that Browning performed with in his early acting career would later appear in his own pictures, many of whom served their apprenticeships with Keystone Cops director Max Sennett, among them Wallace Beery, Ford Sterling, Polly Moran, Wheeler Oakman, Raymond Griffith, Kalla Pasha, Mae Busch, Wallace MacDonald and Laura La Varnie.
In 1913, the 33-year-old Browning was hired by film director D. W. Griffith at Biograph Studios in New York City, first appearing as an undertaker in "Scenting a Terrible Crime" (1913). Both Griffith and Browning departed Biograph and New York that same year and together joined Reliance-Majestic Studios in Hollywood, California. Browning was featured in several Reliance-Majestic films, including The Wild Girl (1917).
Early Film Directing and Screenwriting: 1914-1916.
Film historian Vivian Sobchack reports that “a number of one- or two-reelers are attributed to Browning from 1914 to 1916” and biographer Michael Barson credits Browning’s directorial debut to the one-reeler drama The Lucky Transfer, released in March 1915.
Browning's career almost ended when, intoxicated, he drove his vehicle into a railroad crossing and collided with a locomotive. Browning suffered grievous injuries, as did passenger George Siegmann. A second passenger, actor Elmer Booth was killed instantly.
Film historian Jon Towlson notes that “alcoholism was to contribute to a major trauma in Browning’s personal life that would shape his thematic obsessions…After 1915, Browning began to direct his traumatic experience into his work – radically reshaping it in the process.” According to biographers David J. Skal and Elias Savada, the tragic event transformed Browning’s creative outlook: 
Indeed, the thirty-one films that Browning wrote and directed between 1920 to 1939 were, with few exceptions, melodramas. 
Browning’s injuries likely precluded a further career as an actor. During his protracted convalescence, Browning turned to writing screenplays for Reliance-Majestic. Upon his recovery, Browning joined Griffith's film crew on the set of Intolerance] (1916) as an assistant director and appeared in a bit part for the production’s “modern story” sequence.
Plot and Theme in Browning’s films.
Film historian Vivian Sobchack identifies four plots or [[mise-en-scène]] in which Browning presents his themes:
Sobchack points out that the plot synopsis for these films, considered independently of their cinematic treatments, appear “ludicrous” or “bizarre” in conception. Browning’s handling of the material, however, produce “powerful and disturbing realizations on the screen.”
The melodramas that Browning wrote and directed for M-G-M and Universal are formulaic manifestations of his “compulsive” preoccupation with themes of “moral and sexual frustration, interchangeable guilt [and] patterns of human repulsion and attraction.” Biographer Stuart Rosenthal offers this analysis of the director’s style and themes:
Rosenthal assigns four thematic categories to Browning’s films: 
Reality vs. Appearance, in which an individual’s social exterior (physical beauty, the trappings of authority or professional status) are exposed as facades masking cruel or criminal behavior. [ex. [[The Unholy Three (1925 film)|The Unholy Three]] (1925), [[Where East is East]] (1929)]
Sexual Frustration, often involving a “sacred” father-child or other kinship relation in which “a man’s offspring represent extensions of his own sexuality” provoking a protective response to sexual insults from outsiders. [ex. [[The Road to Mandalay (1926 film)|The Road to Mandalay]] (1926), [[West of Zanzibar (1928 film)|West of Zanzibar]] (1928)].
Conflict of Opposing Tendencies within an Individual, leading to a loss of identity when irreconcilable character traits in a person produces alter egos. Author [[Robert Louis Stevenson]]’s [[Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde]] explores this “intractable frustration.”[ex. [[Outside the Law (1920 film) |Outside the Law]] (1921), [[The Blackbird]] (1926)].
Inability to Assign Guilt, in which a character resorts to violence or criminal acts in order to avenge injustice, and guilt or blame remains ambiguous. [ex. The Unknown (1927), Freaks (1932)]
The factor that unifies all these thematic patterns is frustration: “Frustration is Browning’s dominant theme.”
Director: early silent feature films, 1917-1919.
In 1917, Browning wrote and directed his first full-length feature film Jim Bludso for Fine Arts/ Triangle film companies, starring Wilfred Lucas in the title role. The story is based on a poem by John Hay, a former personal secretary to Abraham Lincoln during the American Civil War. 
Browning married his second wife Alice Watson in 1917; they would remain together until her death in 1944.
Returning to New York in 1917, Browning directed pictures for Metro Pictures. There he made Peggy, the Will O' the Wisp and The Jury of Fate. Both starred Mabel Taliaferro, the latter in a dual role achieved with double exposure techniques that were groundbreaking for the time.. Film historian Vivian Sobchack notes that many of these films “involved the disguise and impersonations found in later Browning films.” (See Filmography below) Browning returned to Hollywood in 1918 and produced three more films for Metro, each of which starred Edith Storey: The Eyes of Mystery, The Legion of Death and Revenge, all filmed and released in 1918. These early and profitable five-, six- and seven-reel features Browning made between 1917-1919 established him as “a successful director and script writer.” 
In the Spring of 1918 Browning departed Metro and signed with Bluebird Photoplays studios (a subsidiary of Carl Laemmle’s Universal Pictures), then in 1919 with Universal where he would direct a series of “extremely successful” films starring Priscilla Dean.
Universal Studios: 1919-1923.
During his tenure at Universal, Browning directed a number of the studio’s top female actors, among them Edith Roberts in "The Deciding Kiss" and "Set Free" (both 1918) and Mary MacLaren in the "The Unpainted Woman", "A Petal on the Current" and "Bonnie, Bonnie Lassie", all 1919 productions. Browning’s most notable films for Universal, however, starred Priscilla Dean, “Universal’s leading lady known for playing ‘tough girls’” and with whom he would direct nine features. 
The Priscilla Dean films.
Browning's first successful Dean picture—a “spectacular melodrama”—is "The Virgin of Stamboul" (1920). Dean portrays Sari, a “virgin beggar girl” who is desired by the Turkish chieftain Achmet Hamid (Wallace Beery). Browning’s handling of the former slapstick comedian Beery as Achmet reveals the actor’s comedic legacy and Browning’s own roots in burlesque. Film historian Stuart Rosenthal wrote that the Dean vehicles possess “the seemingly authentic atmosphere with which Browning instilled his crime melodramas, adding immeasurably to later efforts like "The Black Bird" (1926), "The Show" (1927) and "The Unholy Three." (1925).”
The Dean films exhibit Browning’s fascination with “exotic” foreign settings and with underworld criminal activities, which serve to drive the action of his films. Dean is cast as a thieving demimonde who infiltrates high society to burgle jewelry in "The Exquisite Thief" (1919); in "Under Two Flags" (1922), set in colonial French Algiers, Dean is cast as a French-Arab member of a harem—her sobriquet is “Cigarette—servicing the French Foreign Legion; and in "Drifting" (1923), with its “compelling” Shanghai, China scenes recreated on the Universal backlot, Dean plays an opium dealer. In Browning’s final Dean vehicle at Universal, "White Tiger", he indulged his fascination with “quasi-theatrical” productions of illusion—and revealed to movie audiences the mechanisms of these deceptions. In doing so, Browning—a former member of the fraternity of magicians—violated a precept of their professional code.
Perhaps the most fortuitous outcome of the Dean films at Universal is that they introduced Browning to future collaborator Lon Chaney, the actor who would star in Browning’s most outstanding films of the silent era. Chaney had already earned the sobriquet “The Man of a Thousand Faces” as early as 1919 for his work at Universal. Universal’s vice-president Irving Thalberg paired Browning with Chaney for the first time in "The Wicked Darling" (1919), a melodrama in which Chaney played the thief “Stoop” Conners who forces a poor girl (Dean) from the slums into a life of crime and prostitution.
In 1921, Browning and Thalberg enlisted Chaney in another Dean vehicle, Outside the Law, in which he plays the dual roles of the sinister "Black Mike” Sylva and the benevolent Ah Wing. Both of these Universal production exhibit Browning’s “natural affinity for the melodramatic and grotesque.” In a special effect that drew critical attention, Chaney appears to murder his own dual character counterpart through trick photography. and “with Thalberg supporting their imaginative freedom, Chaney’s ability and unique presence fanned the flames of Browning’s passion for the extraordinary.” Biographer Stuart Rosenthal remarks upon the foundations of the Browning-Chaney professional synergy:
When Thalberg resigned as vice-president at Universal to serve as production manager with the newly amalgamated Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1925, Browning and Chaney accompanied him.
The Browning-Chaney Collaborations at M-G-M: 1925-1929.
After moving to M-G-M in 1925 under the auspices of production manager Irving Thalberg, Browning and Chaney made eight critically and commercially successful feature films, representing the zenith of both their silent film careers. Browning wrote or co-wrote the stories for six of the eight productions. Screenwriter Waldemar Young, credited on nine of the M-G-M pictures, worked effectively with Browning. At M-G-M, Browning would reach his artistic maturity as a filmmaker. 
The first of these M-G-M productions established Browning as a talented filmmaker in Hollywood, and deepened Chaney’s professional and personal influence on the director: "The Unholy Three".
The Unholy Three (1925).
In a circus tale by author Tod Robbins—a setting familiar to Browning—a trio of criminal ex-carnies and a pickpocket form a jewelry theft ring. Their activities lead to a murder and an attempt to frame an innocent bookkeeper. Two of the criminal quartet reveal their humanity and are redeemed; two perish through violent justice. 
The Unholy Three is an outstanding example of Browning’s delight in the “bizarre” melodramas (though here, not macabre) and its “the perverse characterizations” that Browning and Chaney devise anticipate their subsequent collaborations.
Lon Chaney doubles as Professor Echo, a sideshow ventriloquist, and as Mrs. “Granny” O’Grady (a cross-dressing Echo), the mastermind of the gang. Granny/Echo operates a talking parrot pet shop as a front for the operation. Film critic Alfred Eaker notes that Chaney renders “the drag persona with depth of feeling. Chaney never camps it up and delivers a remarkable, multifaceted performance.” 
Harry Earles, a member of The Doll Family midget performers plays the violent and wicked Tweedledee who poses as Granny’s infant grandchild, Little Willie. (Granny conveys the diminutive Willie in a perambulator)
Victor McLagen is cast as weak-minded Hercules, the circus strongman who constantly seeks to assert his physical primacy over his cohorts. Hercules detests Granny/Echo, but is terrified by the ventriloquist’s “pet” gorilla. He doubles as Granny O’Grady’s son-in-law and father to Little Willie. 
The pickpocket Rosie, played by Mae Busch, is the object of Echo’s affection, and they share a mutual admiration as fellow larcenists. She postures as the daughter to Granny/Echo and as the mother of Little Willie.
The pet shop employs the diffident bookkeeper, Hector “The Boob” MacDonald (Matt Moore) who is wholly ignorant of the criminal proceedings. Rosie finds this “weak, gentle, upright, hardworking” man attractive.
When Granny O’Malley assembles her faux-”family” in her parlor to deceive police investigators, the movie audience knows that “the grandmother is the head of a gang and a ventriloquist, the father a stupid Hercules, the mother a thief, the baby a libidinous, greedy [midget], and the pet...an enormous gorilla.” Browning’s portrait is a “sarcastic distortion” that subverts a cliched American wholesomeness and serves to deliver “a harsh indictment...of the bourgeois family.” 
Film historian Stuart Rosenthal identifies “the ability to control another being” as a central theme in "The Unholy Three". The deceptive scheme through which the thieves manipulate wealthy clients, demonstrates a control over “the suckers” who are stripped of their wealth, much as circus sideshow patrons are deceived: Professor Echo and his ventriloquist’s dummy distract a “hopelessly naive and novelty-loving” audience as pickpocket Rosie relieves them of their wallets. Browning ultimately turns the application of “mental control” to serve justice. When bookkeeper Hector takes the stand in court, testifying in his defense against a false charge of murder, the reformed Echo applies his willpower to silence the defendant, and uses his voice throwing power to provide the exonerating testimony. When Hector descends from the stand, he tells his attorney “That wasn’t me talking. I didn’t say a word.” Browning employs a set of dissolves to make the ventriloquists role perfectly clear.
Film historian Robin Blyn comments on the significance of Echo’s courtroom confession: 
With "The Unholy Three," Browning provided M-G-M with a huge box-office and critical success.
The Mystic (1925).
While Lon Chaney was making The Tower of Lies (1925) with director Victor Sjöström Browning wrote and directed an Aileen Pringle vehicle, The Mystic. The picture has many of the elements typical of Browning oeuvre at M-G-M: Carnivals, Hungarian Gypsies and séances provide the exotic "mise-en-scene", while the melodramatic plot involves embezzlement and swindling. AnAmerican con man Michael Nash (Conway Tearle) develops a moral conscience after falling in love with Pringle’s character, Zara, and is consistent with Browning’s “themes of reformation and unpunished crimes.” and the couple achieve a happy reckoning. Browning, a former sideshow performer, is quick to reveal to his movie audience the illusionist fakery that serves to extract a fortune from a gullible heiress, played by Gladys Hulette.
Dollar Down (1925): Browning followed "The Mystic" with another “crook melodrama involving swindlers” for Truart productions. Based on a story by Jane Courthope and Ethyl Hill, the "Dollar Down" stars Ruth Roland and Henry B. Walthall. 
Following these “more conventional” crime films, Browning and Chaney embarked on their final films of the late silent period, “the strangest collaboration between director and actor in cinema history; the premises of the films were outrageous.” 
The Blackbird (1926).
Browning and Chaney were reunited in their next feature film The Blackbird (1926), one of the most “visually arresting” of their collaborations.
Browning introduces Limehouse district gangster Dan Tate (Chaney), alias “The Blackbird", who creates an alter identity, the physically deformed christian missionary “The Bishop.” Tate’s purported “twin” brother is a persona he uses to periodically evade suspicion by the police under “a phony mantle of christian goodness”—an image utterly at odds with the persona of The Blackbird. According to film historian Stuart Rosenthal “Tate’s masquerade as the Bishop succeeds primarily because the Bishop’s face so believably reflects a profound spiritual suffering that is absolutely foreign to the title character [The Blackbird].”
Tate’s competitor in crime, the “gentleman-thief” Bertram “West End Bertie" Glade (Owen Moore, becomes romantically involved with a Limehouse cabaret singer, Mademoiselle Fifi Lorraine (Renée Adorée). The jealous Tate attempts to frame Bertie for the murder of a policeman, but is mortally injured in an accident while in the guise of The Bishop. Tate’s wife, Polly (Doris Lloyd discovers her husband's dual identity, and honors him by concealing his role as “The Blackbird.” The reformed Bertie and his lover Fifi are united in matrimony.
Chaney’s adroit “quick-change” transformations from the Blackbird into The Bishop—intrinsic to the methods of “show culture”—are “explicitly revealed” to the movie audience, such that Browning invites them to share in the deception.
Browning introduces a number of slapstick elements into "The Blackbird". Doris Lloyd, portrays Tate’s ex-wife Limehouse Polly, demonstrating her comic acumen in scenes as a flower girl , and Browning’s Limehouse drunkards are “archetypical of burlesque cinema.” Film historian Boris Henry points out that “it would not be surprising if the fights that Lon Chaney as Dan Tate mimes between his two characters (The Blackbird and The Bishop) were inspired by actor-director Max Linder’s performance in Be My Wife, 1921.”
Film historian Stuart Rosenthal identifies Browning’s characterization of Dan Tate/the Blackbird as a species of vermin lacking in nobility, a parasitic scavenger that feeds on carrion and is unworthy of sympathy.
In death, according to film critic Nicole Brenez, The Blackbird “is deprived of [himself]...death, then, is no longer a beautiful vanishing, but a terrible spiriting away.”
Though admired by critics for Chaney’s performance, the film was only modestly successful at the box office.
The Road to Mandalay (1926).
Any comprehensive contemporary evaluation of Browning’s The Road to Mandalay is problematic. According to Browning biographer Alfred Eaker only a small fraction of the original seven reels exist. A 16mm version survives in a “fragmented and disintegrated state” discovered in France in the 1980s. 
In a story that Browning wrote with screenwriter Herman Mankiewicz , "The Road to Mandalay" (not related to author Rudyard Kipling’s 1890 poem), is derived from the character “dead-eyed” Singapore Joe (Lon Chaney), a Singapore brothel operator. As Browning himself explained: 
The picture explores one of Browning’s most persistent themes: that of a parent who asserts sexual authority vicariously through their own offspring. As such, an Oedipal narrative is established, “a narrative that dominates Browning’s work" and recognized as such by contemporary critics.
Joe’s daughter, Rosemary (Lois Moran), now a young adult, has been raised in a convent where her father left her as an infant with her uncle, Father James (Henry B. Walthall). Rosemary is ignorant of her parentage; she lives a chaste and penurious existence. Brothel keeper Joe makes furtive visits to the shop where she works as a clerk. His attempts to anomalously befriend the girl are met with revulsion at his freakish appearance. Joe resolves to undergo plastic surgery to achieve a reproachment with his daughter and redeem his sordid history. Father James doubts his brothers’ commitment to reform and to reestablish his parenthood. A conflict emerges when Joe’s cohorts and rivals in crime, “The Admiral” Herrington (Owen Moore) and English Charlie Wing (Kamiyama Sojin), members of “the black spiders of the Seven Seas” appear on the scene. The Admiral encounters Rosemary at the bizarre where she works and is instantly smitten with her; his genuine resolve to abandon his criminal life wins Rosemary’s devotion and a marriage is arranged. When Joe discovers these developments, the full force of his “sexual frustrations” are unleashed. Joe’s attempt to thwart his daughter's efforts to escape his control ends when Rosemary stabs her father, mortally wounding him. The denouement is achieved when the dying Joe consents to her marriage and Father James performs the last rites upon his brother.
Film critic Alfred Eaker observes: “"The Road to Mandalay" is depraved, pop-Freudian, silent melodrama at its ripest. Fortunately, both Browning and Chaney approach this hodgepodge of silliness in dead earnest.” Religious imagery commonly appears in Browning’s films, “surrounding his characters with religious paraphernalia.” Browning, a mason, uses Christian iconography to emphasize Joe’s moral alienation from Rosemary. Biographer Stuart Rosenthal writes:
 
Rosenthal adds ““Religion for the Browning hero is an additional spring of frustration - another defaulted promise.”
As in all of the Browning-Chaney collaborations, "The Road to Mandalay" was profitable at the box office.
London After Midnight (1927).
Whereas Browning’s "The Road to Mandalay" (1926) exists in a much deteriorated 16mm abridged version "London After Midnight" is no longer believed to exist, the last print destroyed in an M-G-M vault fire in 1965.
"London After Midnight" is widely considered by archivist’s the Holy Grail and “the most sought after and discussed lost film of the silent era.” A detailed photo reconstruction, based on stills from the film was assembled by Turner Classic Movies’ Rick Schmidlin in 2002.
Based on Browning’s own tale entitled “The Hypnotist”, "London After Midnight" is a “drawing room murder mystery’—its macabre and Gothic atmosphere resembling director Robert Wiene’s 1920 The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari.
Sir Richard Balfour is found dead at the estate of his friend Sir James Hamlin. The gunshot wound to Balfour’s head appears self-inflicted. The Scotland Yard inspector and forensic hypnotist in charge, “Professor” Edward C. Burke (Lon Chaney) receives no reports of foul play and the death is deemed a suicide. Five years past, and the estates current occupants are alarmed by a ghoulish, fanged figure wearing a cape and top hat stalking the hallways at night. He is accompanied by a corpse-like female companion. The pair of intruders are the disguised Inspector Burke, masquerading as a vampire (also played by Chaney), and his assistant, “Luna, the Bat Girl” (Edna Tichenor). When the terrified residents call Scotland Yard, Inspector Burke appears and reopens Balfour’s case as a homicide. Burke uses his double role to stage a series of elaborate illusions and applications of hypnotism to discover the identity of the murderer among Balfour’s former associates.
Browning’s “preposterous” plot is the platform on which he demonstrates the methods of magic and show culture, reproducing the mystifying spectacles of “spirit theater” that purport to operate through the paranormal. Browning’s cinematic illusions are conducted strictly through mechanical stage apparatus: no trick photography is employed. “illusion, hypnotism and disguise” are used to mimic the conceits and pretenses of the occult, but primarily for dramatic effect and only to reveal them as tricks.
After the murderer is apprehended, Browning’s Inspector Burke/The Man in the Beaver Hat reveals the devices and techniques he has used to extract the confession, while systematically disabusing the cast characters—and the movie audience—of any supernatural influence on the foregoing events. Film historians Stefanie Diekmann and Ekkehard Knörer observe succinctly that “All in all, Browning’s scenarios [including London After Midnight] appear as a long series of tricks, performed and explained.”
Lon Chaney’s make-up to create the menacing “Man with the Beaver Hat” is legendary. Biographer Alfred Eaker writes: “Chaney’s vampire...is a make-up artist’s delight, and an actor’s hell. Fishing wire looped around his blackened eye sockets, a set of painfully inserted, shark-like teeth producing a hideous grin, a ludicrous wig under a top hat, and white pancake makeup achieved Chaney’s kinky look. To add to the effect Chaney developed a misshapen, incongruous walk for the character.”
London After Midnight received a mixed critical response, but delivered handsomely at the box office “grossing over $1,000,000 in 1927 dollars against a budget of $151,666.14.”
The Show (1927).
In 1926, while Lon Chaney was occupied making Tell It to the Marines with filmmaker George W. Hill, Browning directed The Show, “one of the most bizarre productions to emerge from silent cinema.” ("The Show" anticipates his subsequent feature with Chaney, a “carnival of terror”: The Unknown).
Screenwriter Waldemar Young based the scenario on elements from the author Charles Tenny Jackson’s "The Day of Souls".
"The Show" is a "tour-de-force" demonstration of Browning’s penchant for the spectacle of carnival sideshow acts combined with the revelatory exposure of the theatrical apparatus and techniques that create these illusions. Film historian Matthew Solomon notes that “this is not specific to his films with Lon Chaney.” Indeed, "The Show" features two of M-G-M’s leading actors: John Gilbert, as the unscrupulous ballyhoo Cock Robin, and Renée Adorée as his tempestuous lover, Salome. Actor Lionel Barrymore plays the homicidal Greek. Romantic infidelities, the pursuit of a small fortune, a murder, attempted murders, Cock Robin’s moral redeemtion and his reconciliation with Salome comprise the plot and its “saccarine” ending.
Browning presents a menagerie of circus sideshow novelty acts from the fictitious “Palace of Illusions”, including disembodied hands delivering tickets to customers; an illusionary beheading of a biblical figure (Gilbert as John the Baptist); Neptuna (Betty Boyd) Queen of the Mermaids; the sexually untoward Zela (Zalla Zarana) Half-Lady; and Arachnida (Edna Tichenor, the Human Spider perched on her web. Browning ultimately reveals “how the trick is done”, explicating the mechanical devices to the film audience - not to the film’s carnival patrons.
The central dramatic event of "The Show" derives from another literary work, a “magic playlet” by Oscar Wilde entitled Salomé (1896). Browning devises an elaborate and “carefully choreographed” sideshow reenactment of Jokanaan’s biblical beheading (played by Gilbert), with Adorée as Salomé presiding over the lurid decapitation, symbolic of sadomasochism and castration.
"The Show" received generally good reviews, but approval was muted due to Gilbert’s unsavory character, Cock Robin. Browning was now poised to make his masterwork of the silent era, "The Unknown" (1927).
The Unknown (1927): A Silent Era Chef D'oeuvre.
The Unknown marks the creative apogee of the Tod Browning and Lon Chaney collaborations, and is widely considered their most outstanding work of the silent era. More so than any of Browning’s silent pictures, he fully realizes one of his central themes in "The Unknown": the linkage of physical deformity with sexual frustration. 
Circus performer “Alonzo the armless", a Gypsy knife-thrower, appears as a double amputee, casting his knives with his feet. His deformity is an illusion (except for a bifid thumb), achieved by donning a corset to bind and conceal his healthy arms. The able-bodied Alonzo, sought by the police, engages in this deception to evade detection and arrest. Alfonzo harbors a secret love for Nanon (Joan Crawford), his assistant in the act. Nanon’s father is the abusive (perhaps sexually so) ringmaster Zanzi (Nick De Ruiz), and Nanon has developed a pathological aversion to any man’s embrace. Her emotional dysfunction precludes any sexual intimacy with the highly virile Alfonzo, his sexual prowess symbolized by his knife-throwing expertise and his double thumb. When Alonzo murders Zanzi during an argument, the homicide is witnessed by Nanon, who detects only the bifid thumb of her father’s assailant.
Browning’s theme of sexual frustration and physical mutilation ultimately manifests itself in Alfonso’s act of symbolic castration; he willingly has his arms amputated by an unlicensed surgeon so as to make himself unthreatening to Nanon (and to eliminate the incriminating bifid thumb), so as to win her affection. The “nightmarish irony” of Alfonso’s sacrifice is the most outrageous of Browning’s plot conceits and consistent with his obsessive examination of “sexual frustration and emasculation”. When Alfonzo recovers from his surgery, he returns to the circus to find that Nanon has overcome her sexual aversions and married the strongman Malabar (Norman Kerry). The primal ferocity of Alfonso’s reaction to Nanon’s betrayal in marrying Malabar is instinctual. Film historian Stuart Rosenthal writes: 
Alfonzo’s efforts at retribution lead to his own horrific death in a “Grand Guignol finale”.
"The Unknown" is widely regarded as the most outstanding of the Browning-Chaney collaborations and a masterpiece of the late silent film era. Film critic Scott Brogan regards "The Unknown" worthy of “cult status.” 
The Big City (1928).
A lost film, The Big City stars Lon Chaney, Marceline Day and Betty Compson, the latter in her only appearance in an M-G-M film. Browning wrote the story and Waldemar Young the screenplay concerning “A gangster Lon Chaney who uses a costume jewelry store as a front for his jewel theft operation. After a conflict with a rival gang, he and his girlfriend Marceline Day reform.”&lt;/ref&gt;
Film historical Vivian Sobchack remarked that “"The Big City" concerns a nightclub robbery, again, the rivalry between two thieves. This time Chaney plays only one of them—without a twisted limb or any facial disguise.’” Critic Stuart Rosenthal commented on "The Big City": “...Chaney, without makeup, in a characteristic gangster role.”
"The Big City" garnered M-G-M $387,000 in profits.
West of Zanzibar (1928).
In 1928, Browning and Lon Chaney embarked upon their penultimate collaboration, West of Zanzibar, based on Chester M. De Vonde play "Kongo" (1926).
scenario by Elliott J. Clawson and Waldemar Young, provided Chaney with dual characterizations: the magician Pharos, and the later paraplegic Pharos who is nicknamed “Dead Legs.” A variation of the “unknown parentage motif” Browning dramatizes a complex tale of “obsessive revenge” and “psychological horror.” Biographer Stuart Rosenthal made these observations on Chaney’s portrayals:
The story opens in Paris, where Pharos, a magician, is cuckolded by his wife Anna (Jacqueline Gadsden) and her lover Crane (Lionel Barrymore). Pharos is crippled when Crane pushes him from a balcony, leaving him a paraplegic. Anna and Crane abscond to Africa. After a year, Phroso learns that Anna has returned. He finds his wife dead in a church, with an infant daughter beside her. He swears to avenge himself both on Crane and the child he assumes was sired by Crane. Unbeknownst to Phroso, the child is actually his. Rosenthal singles out this this scene for special mention: 
Eighteen years hence, the crippled Pharos, now dubbed Death Legs, operates an African trading outpost. He secretly preys upon Crane’s ivory operations employing local tribes and using sideshow tricks and illusions to seize the goods. After years of anticipation, Dead Legs prepares to hatch his “macabre revenge”: a sinister double murder. He summons Anna’s daughter Maizie (Mary Nolan) from the sordid brothel and gin mill where he has left her to be raised. He also invites Crane to visit his outpost so as to expose the identity of the culprit stealing his ivory. Dead Legs has arranged to have Crane murdered, but not before informing him that he will invoke the local Death Code, which stipulates that “a man’s demise be followed by the death of his wife or child.” Crane mockingly disabuses Dead Legs of his gross misapprehension: Maizie is Dead Legs’ daughter, not his, a child that Pharos conceived with Anna in Paris. Crane is killed before Dead Legs can absorb the significance of this news. 
The climax of the film involves Dead Legs’ struggle to save his own offspring from the customary death sentence that his own deadly scheme has set in motion. Dead Legs ultimately suffers the consequences of his “horribly misdirected revenge ploy.” The redemptive element with which Browning-Chaney endows Pharos/Dead Legs fate is noted by Rosenthal: ""West of Zanzibar" reaches the peak of its psychological horror when Chaney discovers that the girl he is using as a pawn in his revenge scheme is his own daughter. Dead Legs undertook his mission of revenge with complete confidence in the righteousness of his cause. Now he is suddenly overwhelmed by the realization of his own guilt. That Barrymore as Crane committed the original transgression in no way diminishes that guilt.”
Dead Legs’ physical deformity reduces him to crawling on the ground, and thus to the “state of an animal.” Browning’s camera placement accentuates his snake-like “slithering” and establishes “his animal transformation by suddenly changing the visual frame of reference to one that puts the viewer on the same level as the beast on the screen, thereby making him vulnerable to it, accomplished by tilting the camera up at floor level in front of the moving subject [used to] accentuate Chaney’s [Dead Legs] slithering movements in West of Zanzibar.” Film historians Stephanie Diekmann and Ekkehard Knörer state more generally “...the spectator in Browning’s films can never remain a voyeur; or rather, he is never safe in his voyeuristic position...” 
Diekmann and Knörer also place "West of Zanzibar" in the within the realm of the Grand Guignol tradition:
Despite being characterized as a "cess-pool" by the censorious Harrison's Reports motion picture trade journal, "West of Zanzibar" enjoyed popular success at the box office. 
Where East is East (1929).
Adapted by Waldemar Young from a story by Browning and Harry Sinclair Drago, Where East is East borrows its title from the opening and closing verses of Rudyard Kipling’s 1889 poem “The Ballad of East and West”: “Oh! East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall meet...” Browning’s appropriation of the term “Where East is East” is both ironic and subversive with regard to his simultaneous cinematic presentation of Eurocentric cliches of the “East” (common in early 20th Century advertising, literature and film), and his exposure of these memes as myths. Film historian Stefan Brandt writes that this verse was commonly invoked by Western observers to reinforce conceptions stressing “the homogeneity and internal consistency of ‘The East’” and points out that Kipling (born and raised in Bombay, India) was “far from being one-dimensional” when his literary work “dismantles the myth of ethnic essentiality”: 
Biographer Bernd Herzogenrath adds that “paradoxically, the film both essentializes the East as a universal and homogeneous entity ("Where East is East”) and deconstructs it as a Western myth consisting of nothing but colorful [male] fantasies.” [brackets and parentheses in original]
The last of Browning-Chaney collaborations with an “outrageous premise” and their final silent era film, "Where East is East" was marketed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer “as a colonial drama in the mold of British imperialist fiction.”
"Where East is East", set in the “picturesque French Indo-China of the 1920s” concerns the efforts of big game trapper “Tiger” Haynes (Chaney) to intervention to stop his beloved half-Chinese daughter Toyo (Lupe Velez) from marrying Bobby “white boy” Bailey, a Western suitor and son of a circus owner. He relents when Bobby rescues Toyo from an escaped tiger. The Asian seductress, Madame de Sylva (Estelle Taylor), Tiger’s former lover and mother to Toyo— who abandoned her infant to be raised by Tiger—returns to lure Bobby from Toyo and ruin the couple's plans for conjugal bliss. Tiger takes drastic action, unleashing a gorilla which dispatches Madame de Sylva but mortally wounds Tiger. He lives long enough witness the marriage of Toyo and Bobby.
In a key sequence in which the American Bobby Bailey (Lloyd Hughes), nicknamed “white boy”, is briefly seduced by the Asian Madame de Sylva (mother to Bobby’s fiancee Toya), Browning offers a cliche-ridden intertitle exchange that is belied by his cinematic treatment. Film historian Stephan Brand writes: “Browning here plays with the ambiguities involved in the common misreading of Kipling’s poem, encouraging his American audience to question the existing patterns of colonial discourse and come to conclusions that go beyond that mode of thinking. The romantic version of the Orient as a land of eternal mysticism is exposed here as a Eurocentric illusion that we must not fall prey to.”
Browning's presentation of the alluring Madame de Sylva -whose French title diverges from her Asian origins- introduces one of Browning’s primary themes: Reality vs. Appearance. Rosenthal notes that “physical beauty masking perversity is identical to the usual Browning premise of respectability covering corruption. This is the formula used in "Where East is East". Tiger’s thorny face masks a wealth of kindness, sensitively and abiding paternal love. But behind the exotic beauty of Madame de Silva lies an unctuous, sinister manner and callous spitefulness.”
The animal imagery with which Browning invests "Where East is East" informed Lon Chaney’s characterization of Tiger Haynes, the name alone identifying him as both “tiger hunter and the tiger himself.” Biographer Stuart Rosenthal comments on the Browning-Chaney characterization of Tiger Haynes:
As in Browning’s "The Unknown" (1927) in which protagonist Alonzo is trampled to death by elephants, “animals become the agents of destruction for Tiger [Haynes] in "Where East is East".”
Silent feature films.
Browning's feature film debut was "Jim Bludso" (1917), about a riverboat captain who sacrifices himself to save his passengers from a fire. It was well received.
Browning moved back to New York in 1917. He directed two films for Metro Studios, "Peggy, the Will O' the Wisp" and "The Jury of Fate". Both starred Mabel Taliaferro, the latter in a dual role achieved with double exposure techniques that were groundbreaking for the time. He moved back to California in 1918 and produced two more films for Metro, "The Eyes of Mystery" and "Revenge".
In the spring of 1918, he left Metro and joined Bluebird Productions, a subsidiary of Universal Pictures, where he met Irving Thalberg. Thalberg paired Browning with Lon Chaney for the first time for the film "The Wicked Darling" (1919), a melodrama in which Chaney played a thief who forces a poor girl (Priscilla Dean) from the slums into a life of crime and possibly prostitution. Browning and Chaney ultimately made 10 films together over the next decade.
The death of his father sent Browning into a depression that led to alcoholism. He was laid off by Universal and his wife left him. However, he recovered, reconciled with his wife, and got a one-picture contract with Goldwyn Pictures. The film he produced for Goldwyn, "The Day of Faith", was a moderate success, putting his career back on track.
Thalberg reunited Browning with Lon Chaney for "The Unholy Three" (1925), the story of three circus performers who concoct a scheme to use disguises to con and steal jewels from rich people. Browning's circus experience shows in his sympathetic portrayal of the antiheroes. The film was a resounding success, so much so that it was later remade in 1930 as Lon Chaney's first (and only) talkie shortly before his death later that same year. Browning and Chaney embarked on a series of popular collaborations, including "The Blackbird" and "The Road to Mandalay".
"The Unknown" (1927), featuring Chaney as an armless knife thrower and Joan Crawford as his scantily clad carnival girl obsession, originally was titled "Alonzo the Armless" and could be considered a precursor to "Freaks" in that it concerns a love triangle involving a circus freak, a beauty, and a strongman.
"London After Midnight" (1927) was Browning's first foray into the vampire genre and is a highly sought-after lost film which starred Chaney, Conrad Nagel, and Marceline Day. The last known print of "London After Midnight" was destroyed in an MGM studio fire in 1965. In 2002, a photographic reconstruction of "London After Midnight" was produced by Rick Schmidlin for Turner Classic Movies.
Browning and Chaney's final collaboration was "Where East Is East" (1929), of which only incomplete prints have survived. Browning's first talkie was "The Thirteenth Chair" (1929), which was also released as a silent and featured Bela Lugosi, who had a leading part as the uncanny inspector, Delzante, solving the mystery with the aid of the spirit medium. This film was directed shortly after Browning's vacation trip to Germany (arriving in the Port of New York, November 12, 1929).
Sound films.
After Chaney's death in 1930, Browning was hired by his old employer Universal Pictures to direct "Dracula" (1931). Although Browning wanted to hire an unknown European actor for the title role and have him be mostly offscreen as a sinister presence, budget constraints and studio interference necessitated the casting of Bela Lugosi and a more straightforward approach.
After directing the boxing melodrama "Iron Man" (1931), Browning began work on "Freaks" (1932). Based on the short story "Spurs" by Clarence Aaron "Tod" Robbins, the screenwriter of "The Unholy Three", the film concerns a love triangle among a wealthy dwarf, a gold-digging aerialist, and a strongman; a murder plot; and the vengeance dealt out by the dwarf and his fellow circus freaks. The film was highly controversial, even after heavy editing to remove many disturbing scenes, and was a commercial failure and banned in the United Kingdom for 30 years.
His career derailed, Browning found himself unable to get his requested projects greenlighted. After directing the drama "Fast Workers" (1933) starring John Gilbert, who was also not in good standing with the studio, he was allowed to direct a remake of "London After Midnight", originally titled "Vampires of Prague" but later retitled "Mark of the Vampire" (1935). In the remake, the roles played by Lon Chaney in the original were split between Lionel Barrymore and Béla Lugosi (spoofing his Dracula image).
After that, Browning directed "The Devil-Doll" (1936), originally titled "The Witch of Timbuctoo", from his own story. The picture starred Lionel Barrymore as an escapee from an island prison who avenges himself on the people who imprisoned him using living "dolls" who are actually people shrunk to doll-size and magically placed under Barrymore's hypnotic control. Browning's final film was the murder mystery "Miracles for Sale" (1939).
External links.
"

