
Týr (; Old Norse: , ) is a god in Germanic mythology. In Norse mythology, from which most surviving narratives about gods among the Germanic peoples stem, Týr sacrifices his hand to the monstrous wolf Fenrir, who bites off his limb while the gods bind the animal, and he is foretold of being consumed by the similarly monstrous dog Garmr during the events of Ragnarök. In wider Germanic mythology, he is known in Old English as ' and in Old High German as ', all stemming from the Proto-Germanic theonym , meaning '(the) God'. Little information about the god survives beyond Old Norse sources. Due to the etymology of the god's name and the shadowy presence of the god in the extant Germanic corpus, some scholars propose that Týr may have once held a more central place among the deities of early Germanic mythology.
 is the eponym of the Tiwaz rune (), a letter of the runic alphabet corresponding to the Latin letter "T". By way of the process of , the deity is the namesake of Tuesday ("s day') in Germanic languages, including English. , in which Romans interpreted other gods as forms of their own, generally renders the god as "Mars", the ancient Roman war god, and it is through that lens that most Latin references to the god occur. For example, the god may be referenced as "Mars Thingsus" (Latin 'Mars of the Thing') on 3rd century Latin inscription, reflecting a strong association with the Germanic thing, a legislative body among the ancient Germanic peoples.
In Old Norse sources, Týr is alternately described as the son of the jötunn Hymir (in ) or of the god Odin (in ). "Lokasenna" makes reference to an unnamed otherwise unknown consort, perhaps also reflected in the continental Germanic record (see Zisa).
Various place names in Scandinavia refer to the god, and a variety of objects found in England and Scandinavia may depict the god or invoke him.
Name.
Etymology.
The Old Norse theonym "Týr" stems from an earlier Proto-Norse form reconstructed as *"Tīwaʀ", which derives – like its Germanic cognates "Tīg", "Tīw" (Old English) and *"Ziu" (Old High German) – from the Proto-Germanic theonym *"Tīwaz", meaning '(the) God'. The name of a Gothic deity named "*Teiws" (later *"Tīus") may also be reconstructed based on the associated rune "tyz". In Old Norse poetry, the plural "tívar" is used for 'the gods', and the singular "týr", meaning '(a) god', occurs in kennings for Odin and Thor. Modern English writers frequently anglicize the god's name by dropping the proper noun's diacritic, rendering Old Norse "Týr" as "Tyr".
The Proto-Germanic masculine noun *"tīwaz" (pl. *"tīwōz") means 'a god, a deity', and it probably served as a title that came to be associated with a specific deity whose original name is now lost. It stems from Proto-Indo-European *"deywós", meaning 'celestial, heavenly one', hence a 'god' (cf. Sanskrit "devá" 'heavenly, divine', Old Lithuanian "deivas", Latin "deus" 'a god, deity'), itself a derivation from "*dyēus," meaning 'diurnal sky', hence 'daylight-sky god' (cf. Sanskrit "Dyáuṣ", Greek "Zeus", Latin "Jove")"." The Germanic noun *"tīwaz" is further attested in the Finnic loanword "teivas", found as a suffix in the deities and "Rukotiivo". The Romano-Germanic deity "Alateivia" may also be related, although its origin remains unclear.
Due to linguistic evidence and early native comparisons between *"Tīwaz" and the Roman god Mars, especially under the name "Mars Thingsus", a number of scholars have interpreted *"Tīwaz" as a Proto-Germanic sky-, war- and thing-god. Other scholars reject however his identification as a 'sky-god', since *"tīwaz" was likely not his original name but rather an epithet that came to be associated with him.
Origin of "Tuesday".
The modern English weekday name "Tuesday" comes from the Old English "Tīwesdæg", meaning 'day of Tīw'. It is cognate with Old Norse "Týsdagr", Old Frisian "Tīesdi", and Old High German "Ziostag" (Middle High German "Zīstac"). All of them stem from Late Proto-Germanic *"Tiwasdag" ('Day of Tīwaz'), a calque of Latin "dies Martis" ('Day of Mars'; cf. modern Italian "martedì", French "mardi", Spanish "martes"). This attests to an early Germanic identification of *Tīwaz with Mars.
Germanic weekday names for 'Tuesday' that do not transparently extend from the above lineage may also ultimately refer to the deity, including Middle Dutch "Dinxendach" and "Dingsdag", Middle Low German "Dingesdach", and Old High German "Dingesdag" (modern "Dienstag"). These forms may refer to the god's association with the thing, a traditional legal assembly common among the ancient Germanic peoples with which the god is associated. This may be either explained by the existence of an epithet, "Thingsus" ("*Þingsaz" 'thing-god'), frequently attached to Mars (*"Tīwaz"), or simply by the god's strong association with the assembly.
T-rune.
The god is the namesake of the rune ᛏ representing /"t"/ (the Tiwaz rune) in the runic alphabets, the indigenous alphabets of the ancient Germanic peoples prior to their adaptation of the Latin alphabet. On runic inscriptions, ᛏ often appears as a magical symbol. The name first occurs in the historical record as "tyz", a character in the Gothic alphabet (4th century), and it was also known as "tī" or "tir" in Old English, and "týr" in Old Norse. The name of Týr may also occur in runes as on the 8th century Ribe skull fragment.
Toponyms.
A variety of place names in Scandinavia refer to the god. For example, "Tyrseng", in Viby, Jutland, Denmark (Old Norse "*Týs eng", 'Týr's meadow') was once a stretch of meadow near a stream called "Dødeå" ('stream of the dead' or 'dead stream'). Viby also contained another theonym, "Onsholt" ("Odin's Holt"), and religious practices associated with Odin and Týr may have occurred in these places. A spring dedicated to Holy Niels that was likely a Christianization of prior indigenous pagan practice also exists in Viby. "Viby" may mean "the settlement by the sacred site". Archaeologists have found traces of sacrifices going back 2,500 years in Viby.
The forest Tiveden, between Närke and Västergötland, in Sweden, may mean "Tyr's forest", but its etymology is uncertain, and debated. "Ti-" may refer to "tyr" meaning "god" generally, and so the name may derive from Proto-Indo-European *"deiwo-widus", meaning "the forest of the gods". According to Rudolf Simek, the existence of a cult of the deity is also evidenced by place names such as "Tislund" ('Týr's grove'), which is frequent in Denmark, or "Tysnes" ('Týr's peninsula') and "Tysnesø" ('Tysnes island') in Norway, where the cult appears to have been imported from Denmark.
Attestations.
Roman era.
While Týr's etymological heritage reaches back to the Proto-Indo-European period, very few direct references to the god survive prior to the Old Norse period. Like many other non-Roman deities, Týr receives mention in Latin texts by way of the process of "interpretatio romana", in which Latin texts refer to the god by way of a perceived counterpart in Roman mythology. Latin inscriptions and texts frequently refer to Týr as Mars.
The first example of this occurs on record in Roman senator Tacitus's ethnography "Germania":
These deities are generally understood by scholars to refer to *"Wōđanaz" (known widely today as "Odin"), *"Þunraz" (known today widely as "Thor"), and *"Tīwaz", respectively. The identity of the "Isis" of the Suebi remains a topics of debate among scholars. Later in "Germania", Tacitus also mentions a deity referred to as "regnator omnium deus" venerated by the Semnones in a grove of fetters, a sacred grove. Some scholars propose that this deity is in fact *"Tīwaz".
A votive altar has been discovered during excavations at Housesteads Roman Fort at Hadrian's Wall in England that had been erected at the behest of Frisian legionaries. The altar dates from the 3rd century CE and bears the Latin inscription "Deo Marti Thingso Et Duabus Alaisiagis Bede Et Fimmilene". In this instance, the epithet "Thingsus" is a Latin rendering of Proto-Germanic theonym *"Þingsaz". This deity is generally interpreted by scholars to refer to Týr. The goddesses referred to as "Beda" and "Fimmilene" are otherwise unknown, but their names may refer to Old Frisian legal terms.
In the sixth century, the Roman historian Jordanes writes in his "De origine actibusque Getarum" that the Goths, an east Germanic people, saw the same "Mars" as an ancestral figure:
&lt;br&gt;
Old English.
The Latin deity Mars was occasionally glossed by Old English writers by the name "Tīw" or "Tīg". The genitive "tīwes" also appears in the name for Tuesday, "tīwesdæg".
Viking Age and post-Viking Age.
By the Viking Age, *Tīwaz had developed among the North Germanic peoples into Týr. The god receives numerous mentions in North Germanic sources during this period, but far less than other deities, such as Odin, Freyja, or Thor. The majority of these mentions occur in the "Poetic Edda", compiled in the 13th century from traditional source material reaching into the pagan period, and the "Prose Edda", composed by Icelandic skald and politician Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century.
"Poetic Edda".
Although Týr receives several mentions in the "Poetic Edda", of the three poems in which he is mentioned—"Hymiskviða", "Sigrdrífumál", and "Lokasenna"—only the incomplete poem, "Hymiskviða", features him in a prominent role. In "Hymiskviða", Týr says that his father, Hymir, owns a tremendous cauldron with which he and his fellow gods can brew fathoms of ale. Thor and Týr set out to retrieve it. Týr meets his nine-hundred headed grandmother ("who hates him"), and a girl clad in gold helps the two hide from Hymir.
Upon his return from hunting, Hymir's wife (unnamed) tells Hymir that his son has come to visit, that Týr has brought with him Thor, and that the two are behind a pillar. With just one glance, Hymir immediately smashes the pillar and eight nearby kettles. The kettle containing Týr and Thor, particularly strong in its construction, does not break, and out of it the two gods stride.
Hymir sees Thor and his heart jumps. The jötunn orders three headless oxen boiled for his guests, and Thor eats two of the beasts. Hymir tells the two that the following night, "we'll have to hunt for us three to eat". Thor asks for bait so that he might row out into the bay. Hymir says that the god can take one of his oxen for bait; Thor immediately chooses a black ox, and the poem continues without further mention of Týr.
In "Sigrdrífumál", the valkyrie Sigrdrífa imparts in the hero Sigurd knowledge of various runic charms. One charm invokes the god Týr:
In "Lokasenna", the gods hold a feast. Loki bursts in and engages in flyting, a contest of insults, with the gods. The prose introduction to the poem mentions that "Tyr was in attendance, even though he had only one hand because the wolf Fenrir had recently ripped off the other while the wolf was being bound." Loki exchanges insults with each of the gods. After Loki insults the god Freyr, Týr comes to Freyr's defense. Loki says that "you can't be the right hand of justice among the people" because his right hand was torn off by Fenrir, elsewhere described as Loki's child. Týr says that although he misses his hand, Loki misses Fenrir, who is now bound and will remain so until the events of Ragnarök.
Loki's response contains an otherwise unknown claim about Týr's otherwise unidentified consort: "Shut up, Tyr, my son came from your wife. And you haven't been paid a penny or an ell of cloth as recompense for this, you rat."
"Prose Edda".
The "Prose Edda" sections "Gylfaginning" and "Skáldskaparmál" reference Týr several times. The god is introduced in part 25 of the "Gylfaginning" section of the book:
This tale receives further treatment in section 34 of "Gylfaginning" ("The Æsir brought up the wolf at home, and it was only Tyr who had the courage to approach the wolf and give it food."). Later still in "Gylfaginning", High discusses Týr's foreseen death during the events of Ragnarök:
"Skáldskaparmál" opens with a narrative wherein twelve gods sit upon thrones at a banquet, including Týr. Later in "Skáldskaparmál", the skald god Bragi tells Ægir (described earlier in "Skáldskaparmál" as a man from the island of Hlesey) how kennings function. By way of kennings, Bragi explains, one might refer to the god Odin as "Victory-Tyr", "Hanged-Tyr", or "Cargo-Tyr"; and Thor may be referred to as "Chariot-Tyr".
Section nine of "Skáldskaparmál" provides skalds with a variety of ways in which to refer to Týr, including "the one handed As", "feeder of the wolf", "battle-god", and "son of Odin". The narrative found in "Lokasenna" occurs in prose later in "Skáldskaparmál". Like in "Lokasenna", Týr appears here among around a dozen other deities. Similarly, Týr appears among a list of Æsir in section 75.
In addition to the above mentions, Týr's name occurs as a kenning element throughout "Skáldskaparmál" in reference to the god Odin.
Archaeological record.
Scholars propose that a variety of objects from the archaeological record depict Týr. For example, a Migration Period gold bracteate from Trollhättan, Sweden, features a person receiving a bite on the hand from a beast, which may depict Týr and Fenrir. A Viking Age hogback in Sockburn, County Durham, England may depict Týr and Fenrir.
Scholarly reception.
Due in part to the etymology of the god's name, scholars propose that Týr once held a far more significant role in Germanic mythology than the scant references to the deity indicate in the Old Norse record. Some scholars propose that the prominent god Odin may have risen to prominence over Týr in prehistory, at times absorbing elements of the deity's domains. For example, according to scholar Hermann Reichert, due to the etymology of the god's name and its transparent meaning of ""the" god", "Odin ... must have dislodged Týr from his pre-eminent position. The fact that Tacitus names two divinities to whom the enemy's army was consecrated ... may signify their co-existence around 1 A.D."
The "Sigrdrífumál" passage above has resulted in some discourse among runologists. For example, regarding the passage, runologists Mindy MacLeod and Bernard Mees say:

