
The Fantasy Trip (TFT) is a tabletop role-playing game designed by Steve Jackson and originally published by Metagaming Concepts. In 2019, "TFT" was republished by Steve Jackson Games as "The Fantasy Trip" Legacy Edition.
History.
"TFT" was developed from Metagaming's tactical combat MicroGames "Melee" and "Wizard", also designed by Jackson, which provided the basic combat and magic rules. These games could be played on their own, or, using the gamemaster's module "In the Labyrinth", expanded into a full-fledged role-playing game. The basic combat and magic rules presented in "Melee" and "Wizard" were greatly expanded for purposes of role-playing in "Advanced Melee" and "Advanced Wizard". "TFT" was the first published role-playing game to use a point-buy system for character generation, instead of the random dice roll method routinely used in the 1970s.
Metagaming also published a total of eight "MicroQuests" adventures for "The Fantasy Trip". These inexpensive adventures allowed for group or solitary play. More traditional RPG modules were also released, including "Tollenkar's Lair", a traditional dungeon crawl adventure published in 1980, and "Warrior Lords of Darok" and "Forest Lords of Dihad", published in 1982 for "The Land Beyond the Mountains" campaign setting in partnership with Gamelords. The "Thieves' World" licensed campaign setting, published by Chaosium in 1981, also included character statistics and notes for use with "TFT".
Two Metagaming-published magazines, "The Space Gamer" and "Interplay" featured "TFT" material, including designer notes, setting expansions, and alternate rules.
In 1988, Hobby Japan released a Japanese-language edition of "TFT" under the name . It combined in a single volume the rules from "Melee" and "Wizard" along with the MicroQuests "Death Test", "Death Test 2", "Grail Quest", "Treasure of the Silver Dragon", and "Treasure of Unicorn Gold".
Jackson–Thompson split.
Jackson left Metagaming in 1980. By that time, Howard M. Thompson, the owner of Metagaming, was not happy with the "TFT" work done by Steve Jackson, stating that it was too complex and had taken too long. To address some of these concerns, Thompson partially revised the "TFT" mechanics for "Dragons of UnderEarth", a compact set of fantasy role-playing rules derived from "Melee", "Wizard" and "ITL", with simplified rules for combat and magic, and the related "The Lords of UnderEarth" mass combat system.
In 1983, Thompson closed down Metagaming and sold most of its assets. Jackson tried to purchase the rights to "The Fantasy Trip", but Thompson's asking price of $250,000 was much too high, and "TFT" went out of print. This led Jackson to begin work on a new "third generation" role-playing system that eventually became "GURPS" (the Generic Universal Role-Playing System), which was strongly influenced by "The Fantasy Trip".
Jackson reclaims TFT.
In December 2017, Jackson announced he had exercised an option under U.S. law for an author to unilaterally terminate a grant of publication rights between 35 and 40 years after publication, which allowed him to regain rights to "The Fantasy Trip". In July 2018, Steve Jackson Games launched a Kickstarter campaign to reissue "Melee", "Wizard", and a "TFT Legacy Edition" boxed set with the expanded "In the Labyrinth" rules, among other materials. The revived "TFT" proved a success for Steve Jackson Games, raising more than $450,000 in 2018, and the company has committed to expanding and continued support for "TFT".
"The Fantasy Trip" 1977-1983.
Melee.
Metagaming released "Melee" in 1977 as MicroGame #3. It was designed to be a simple, fast-playing, man-to-man tactical combat boardgame. The game came with a small empty hex map, a counter sheet of men, monsters, and weapons (for any weapons dropped in combat), as well as a 17-page rulebook.
Every figure had a Strength and Dexterity attribute. Strength governed how much damage a figure could take and the size of weapons which could be used; heavier weapons increased the damage one inflicted in combat. Dexterity determined how likely one was to hit one's opponent. Armor could be worn, which would reduce the amount of damage taken in combat while lowering one's Dexterity.
Wizard.
Metagaming released "Wizard" in 1978 as MicroGame #6, a pocket board game of individual magical combat. Its 32-page rulebook included most of the "Melee" combat system with the addition of a magic system.
"Wizard" added Intelligence (IQ) as a third attribute that determined magical ability. A player could improve his character by adding points to the character's attribute scores. A high IQ score allowed the use of more varied and powerful spells. Casting a spell would temporarily drain a character's strength score, limiting the number of spells one could cast before requiring rest to regain strength.
In the Labyrinth.
Released in 1980 as an 80-page, 8 × 11 saddle-stitched book, "In the Labyrinth: Game Masters' Campaign and Adventure Guide" added a role-playing system and fantasy-world background to "The Fantasy Trip". Released simultaneously and in the same format were "Advanced Melee" and "Advanced Wizard", which greatly expanded and revised the physical and magical combat systems. Character creation, which had been part of the original "Melee" and "Wizard", was incorporated into "In the Labyrinth".
The three books together formed the complete "Fantasy Trip" game system. As in the original MicroGames, each character had Strength, Dexterity and IQ attributes, each calibrated to 10 for an average human. New (human) characters began with 8 points of each trait, with 8 extra points for the player to add to any of the abilities as they desired.
"In the Labyrinth" introduced a point-buy skill system, an extension and generalization of the magic system inherited from "Wizard". Each character had one talent or skill point per point of IQ, and each skill had a skill point cost as well as a minimum IQ to learn it. The range of abilities provided by character classes in a first-generation game like "Dungeons &amp; Dragons" was replaced with talents. For example, the "Thief" talent would allow a player to roll against his Dexterity to pick a pocket or open a lock. Other talents included standard fantasy skills such as Literacy, Alertness, or Weapon Proficiency. It was possible for a wizard to learn mundane skills and for a hero to learn a spell or two (with great difficulty).
Reception.
Ronald Pehr reviewed "The Fantasy Trip" in "The Space Gamer" No. 31. Pehr commented that ""The Fantasy Trip" is an excellent FRP game system. I'd have liked it to be better organized and a few dollars cheaper. Those who purchase it anyway will be very glad they did."
Unreleased Publications.
Beyond these products, additional supplements were in various stages of playtest, design, and development when Metagaming shuttered. Among these, according to a February 1982 company memo, were "High Noon", an old west rules set; "In the Name of Justice" and "Herodium", comic book superheroes rules sets; an adventure, "Nosferatu"; and a campaign setting, "The Inner Sea".
"The Fantasy Trip Legacy Edition" 2019.
On December 26, 2017, Steve Jackson announced he had re-acquired the rights for the "TFT" products he authored for Metagaming, specifically "Melee", "Wizard", "Death Test", "Death Test 2", "Advanced Melee", "Advanced Wizard", "In the Labyrinth", and "Tollenkar's Lair". This was accomplished through the provisions of 17 U.S. Code § 203, which allows authors to reclaim works after 35 years. The process "took well over a year" and "was also not cheap", according to Jackson, but it allowed for the revival of "TFT" by Steve Jackson Games.
On July 23, 2018, Steve Jackson Games opened a Kickstarter campaign for The Fantasy Trip Legacy Edition including updated versions of all the works reclaimed from Metagaming; the new version of "In the Labyrinth" incorporated "Advanced Melee" and "Advanced Wizard", as originally envisioned by Jackson. The Kickstarter campaign was funded the same day. The game was released for retail sale on April 17, 2019.
Subsequently, Steve Jackson Games has kickstarted a group of "TFT" accessories, "Decks of Destiny", as well as a new "TFT" zine, "Hexagram". Additional supporting materials, including adventures, solo/programmed adventures, Quick Quests, and beastiaries are also planned. The company also announced a licensing structure allowing other companies to produce material for "TFT"; the first such licensed project was a series of five adventures published by Gaming Ballistic in 2019.
Fan activity and retro-clones.
A number of dedicated fanzines supported the original publication. Lester W. Smith's "The Fantasy Forum" ran from 1987 to 1992 with a total of ten issues. "Inept Adept" and "Goblin Keep" published two issues each. A fourth fanzine, "Vindicator", was devoted to MicroGames in general but did include some material specific to "TFT". "Vindicator" published at least 14 issues from 1995 to 1998. A number of tribute and fan websites preserved and expanded "TFT" over the years, including a long-running E-mail discussion list archived at tft.brainiac.com.
At least two game companies have developed material inspired by and largely compatible with "TFT", similar to retroclone games. Dark City Games has offered "MicroQuest"-style programed adventures since 2005 for its "Heroes of the Ancient World" system, as well as "TFT"-compatible rules and adventures for wild west and science-fiction genres. "Heroes &amp; Other Worlds" similarly builds on "TFT", albeit with greater deviation from the original rules.
External links.
Reviews on RPGnet:

