
Transport in the Dominican Republic utilizes a system of roads, airports, ports, harbours, and an urban railway.
Roadways.
Five main highways (DR-1, DR-2, DR-3, DR-4, DR-5) connect the Dominican Republic's biggest cities and tourist centers; they are in good condition. There are nearly of highways and roads, 9,872 being paved and (2002 est.) unpaved. Like any underdeveloped nation, the Dominican Republic suffers from a lack of good paved roads to connect smaller towns and less populated areas, though work on paving them proceeds; major town roads are kept in good condition.
Public transportation.
Mass transit.
The Santo Domingo Metro is the first mass transit system in the country, and the second among Caribbean &amp; Central American nations. It is the most extensive metro system in the region by length and total number of stations. On February 27, 2008, the incumbent president Leonel Fernández test-rode the system for the first time, and thereafter free service was offered several times. Commercial service began on January 30, 2009. Several additional lines are currently planned.
Santiago Light Rail is a planned light rail system, still at the development stage, in the Dominican Republic's second-largest city Santiago de los Caballeros; its construction was once slated to begin in mid-2008 but is currently on hold, due to lack of approval and of central government funds.
Buses.
The Dominican Republic has a bus system that is rather reliable, and most of these public transportation vehicles are fairly comfortable. The fare is generally inexpensive, and there are bus terminals and stops in most of the island's major cities.
Public Cars ("Carros Públicos").
The Public Cars ("Carros Públicos–Conchos") are privately owned passenger cars that transit a specific route daily and passengers pay a certain fee with the convenience of stopping anywhere. This comprises one of the main ways of transportation inside the capital city of Santo Domingo, as well as other major cities. This system, though, is not very reliable and lacks discipline. The high number of public cars that travel the roads, and the fact that they do not lend themselves to regulation or central control, causes frequent transit problems among city roads. They may also be somewhat uncomfortable, since they try to fit as many people as possible inside them. As a standard, a four-person sedan (driver included) usually carries six passengers, twice the amount for which they were designed.
Railways.
Rail operations are provided by one state-owned operator and several private operators (mainly for sugar mills):
Ports and harbors.
Major ports and harbours in the Dominican Republic:
Ports.
The following six local ports are a single pier with berth facility:
A local ferry service runs daily between the Samaná and Sabana del Mar ports.
Entering the ports.
Boaters and sailors who wish to dock in any of the Dominican Republic's ports must follow certain entry requirements: 
Airports.
In 2009, there were seven major and 31 minor airports in the Dominican Republic. The major ones were:
National airlines.
Flights.
There are direct flights to and from the Dominican Republic from the United States, Cuba, Canada, Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Argentina, Brazil, Europe and the Caribbean.

