
Toilet humour, or potty or scatological humour (compare scatology), is a type of off-colour humour dealing with defecation, urination and flatulence, and to a lesser extent vomiting and other bodily functions. It sees substantial crossover with sexual humour, such as dick jokes.
Toilet humour is popular among a wide range of ages, but is especially popular with children and young teenagers, for whom cultural taboos related to acknowledgement of waste excretion still have a degree of novelty. The humour comes from the rejection of such taboos, and is a part of modern culture. Examples can also be found in earlier literature, including "The Canterbury Tales" by Geoffrey Chaucer.
Music.
Toilet humour is sometimes found in song and rhyme, particularly schoolboy songs. Examples of this are found in Mozart and scatology, and variants of the German folk schoolboys' song known as the "Scheiße-Lied" (English: "Shit-Song") which is indexed in the German "Volksliederarchiv". The children's Spanish musical duo, , made a song called "Caca Culo Pedo Pis" which literally translates to "Poop Ass Fart Pee".
American musician Matt Farley is known for writing and performing a multitude of songs related to urine, feces, vomit, and various other bodily fluids under the pseudonym "The Toilet Bowl Cleaners", including one of his most popular songs entitled "Poop In My Fingernails".
Farley has another pseudonym, "The Odd Man Who Sings About Poop, Puke, and Pee."
Books.
One of the most popular books about defecation and accidents in toilets is a guide that began as "Shitting Pretty" and then was relaunched as "How to Shit around the World".
The children's book series, "Captain Underpants", copiously uses toilet humor. "Doctor Diaper", "The Bionic Booger Boy", and "Professor Pippy Pee-Pee Poopypants" are among the villains in the series.
Television.
The American titular comedy duo Tim &amp; Eric have made numerous comedy sketches based around toilet humour. For example, they have made fake commercials for non-existent products such as the "Poop Tube" (a device that lets people release liquefied faecal matter into a urinal while standing up), the "fla'Hat" (a hat that is connected to the wearer's anus which expands when storing flatulence), and "D-Pants" (an be invented by "Diarrhea Jones" that captures "uncontrollable diarrhoea").
English actor Adrian Edmondson, who appeared in many shows utilising toilet humour, is quoted as saying, "Toilet humour is like jazz: everybody has an idea what it is, and most people don’t like it. But the people who do like it are fervent about it and like it until they die.”

