
The Slits were a British punk and post-punk band formed in London in 1976 by members of the groups the Flowers of Romance and the Castrators. The group's early line-up consisted of Ari Up (Ariane Forster) and Palmolive (a.k.a. Paloma Romero, who played briefly with Spizzenergi and later left to join the Raincoats), with Viv Albertine and Tessa Pollitt replacing founding members Kate Korus and Suzy Gutsy. Their 1979 debut album, "Cut", has been called one of the defining releases of the post-punk era.
Career.
1976–1982.
The group supported the Clash on their 1977 "White Riot" tour along with Buzzcocks, the Prefects and Subway Sect. Club performances of the Slits during this period are included in "The Punk Rock Movie" (1978). In November 1978, the Slits toured with the Clash again on the "Sort it Out Tour" and were joined by the Innocents who opened the shows. Joe Strummer said the group would be "great" with intense gigging.
Palmolive left the band in 1978 and debuted with the Raincoats on 4 January 1979. She was replaced by the drummer Budgie (Peter Clarke), formerly of the Spitfire Boys and later of Siouxsie and the Banshees. With the change of drummer came a change of musical style. The Slits' originally raw, raucous and drum-dominated live sound, as captured on two Peel Sessions in 1977 and 1978, was cleaned up and polished to a more bass-orientated sound with the Budgie line up, and their new style drew heavily from reggae, dub and world music.
Their Dennis Bovell-produced debut album "Cut" was released in September 1979 on Island Records, with Neneh Cherry joining as additional vocalist. The album's sleeve art depicted the band naked, except for mud and loincloths.it is often claimed that Palmolive left partly because she did not like the album artwork, including by Palmolive herself, but Viv Albertine confirmed Palmolive had been asked to leave the band several months previously and she does not appear on the record.
The Slits' sound and attitude became increasingly experimental and avant-garde during the early 1980s, when they formed an alliance with Bristol post-punk band the Pop Group, sharing drummer Bruce Smith and releasing a joint single, "In the Beginning There Was Rhythm/Where There's a Will There's a Way" (Y Records). This was followed by a bizarre untitled compilation album of mostly homemade demos and live performances from before the release of "Cut". The band toured widely and released their second studio album, "Return of the Giant Slits" before breaking up in early 1982. Ari Up went on to be part of the New Age Steppers.
2005–2010.
Ari Up and Tessa Pollitt reformed the band with new members in 2005, as Viv Albertine was unwilling to rejoin, and in 2006 released the EP "Revenge of the Killer Slits". The EP featured former Sex Pistols member Paul Cook and Marco Pirroni (formerly of Adam and the Ants, and Siouxsie and the Banshees) as both musicians and co-producers. Cook's daughter Hollie played with the band, singing and playing keyboards. Other members of the reformed band were No (of the Home Office) on guitar, German drummer Anna Schulte, and Adele Wilson on guitar.
The band toured the United States for the first time in twenty-five years during 2006's 'States of Mind' tour. In 2007, they toured Australia as well as returning to the US, where they opened for Sonic Youth at New York's McCarren Park Pool. In their first visit to Japan, the band undertook a short tour in October 2007.
In 2008, the band again toured America. Adele Wilson left the band and No was replaced by American guitarist Michelle Hill. In November 2008, the band played Ladyfest in Manchester, and visited London Astoria the following month. In January 2009, the Slits' Myspace page listed former guitarist Viv Albertine as one of the group's current members; however Albertine's own Myspace blog stated that she only rejoined to play two shows.
In January 2009, the Los Angeles-based Narnack Records announced they had signed the band to a recording contract. A biography – "Typical Girls? The Story of the Slits" by Zoe Street Howe was published in the UK by Omnibus Press in July 2009.
The band's third full-length album entitled "Trapped Animal" was released in 2009, and the band continued to perform live.
Founding member Ari Up died in Los Angeles on October 2010 at the age of 48. The band's final work, the video for the song "Lazy Slam" from "Trapped Animal", was released posthumously according to Ari Up's wishes.
In October 2010, Viv Albertine announced via Twitter that she and Tessa Pollitt intend to release the "last ever Slits song", titled "Shoulda Coulda Woulda" from 1981 on cassette tape with hand-drawn covers.
In popular culture.
The band’s name appears in the lyrics of the Le Tigre song "Hot Topic."

