
Telecommunications in Poland include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.
Telephony.
The market for fixed line telephony services and infrastructure was monopolized by the state until 1990. The state monopoly was implemented by the PPTiT which was subordinated to the Ministry of Communications. The telephony segments of that entity were spun-off and incorporated into Telekomunikacja Polska which was later privatized and sold to Orange Polska. The Telecommunications Act of 1990 allowed the provision of telecommunication infrastructure and services by the former monopoly. After 2000, other operators were allowed to use TP's telecommunications infrastructure under Third-party Access.
From the communist era Poland inherited an underdeveloped and outmoded system of telephones, with some areas (e.g. in the extreme South East) being served by manual exchanges. In December 2005 the last analog exchange was shut down. All telephone lines are now served by modern fully computerized exchanges (Siemens EWSD, Alcatel S12, Lucent 5ESS, Alcatel E10). The former state owned telephone monopoly (TPSA) has been mostly privatized, with France Telecom buying the largest share. Various other companies have entered the fixed phone market, but generally aiming for niches (e.g. Sferia with fixed wireless, Netia covering primarily business). Whilst prices have reduced and availability has increased considerably since the introduction of competition, there is little sign of TPSA's market share being seriously reduced.
The long waiting list for fixed line telephones helped in a boom in mobile cellular telephone use and all mobile phone operators in Poland use GSM. There are three competing networks with similar market share, T-Mobile (T-Mobile and Heyah brands), Orange Polska (Orange and POP brands) and Plus (Plus and Sami Swoi brands). The fourth network, Play, owned by Netia and Novator Telecom, started offering UMTS network services in early 2007. All mobile operators have UMTS services in the major cities, with nationwide coverage planned.

