
The Book of Nephi: The Son of Nephi, Who Was the Son of Helaman, usually referred to as Third Nephi or 3 Nephi, is one of fifteen books that make up the Book of Mormon. This book was firstly called "III Nephi" in the 1879 edition and "Third Nephi" in the 1920 edition of the Book of Mormon. It contains an account of the visit of Jesus Christ to the inhabitants of ancient America. Jesus had told his disciples in Jerusalem according to the Bible in the Gospel of John, "And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." In this book, Christ declares to those in ancient America that they were these "other sheep" of whom he spoke. The account of this visit is recorded beginning in chapter 11 of 3 Nephi.
Narrative of Christ's Visit.
Before Christ visits these people there is a giant storm, a tremendous earthquake, and darkness. Cities burn, cities sink into the sea, mountains are brought down and valleys brought up. There is sharp lightning, wind, and thunderings and many people die. After the great storm comes darkness and the voices of mourning for the dead. The darkness lasts for approximately three days, during which a voice is "heard among all the inhabitants of the earth, upon all the face of this land, crying: Wo, wo, wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the whole earth except that they shall repent; for the devil laugheth, and his angels rejoice, because of the slain fair sons and daughters of my people; and it is because of their iniquities and abominations that they are fallen!" (3 Nephi 9:1-2) The voice then lists cities "and the inhabitants thereof" he had destroyed because of their wickedness: Zarahemla (3 Nephi 9:3), Moroni (9:4), Moronihah (9:5), Gilgal (9:6), Onihah, Mocum, and Jerusalem (the New World city founded by the Lamanites, Amelekites, and Amulonites, not Jerusalem in Judaea) (9:7), Gadiandi, Gadiomnah, Jacob, and Gimgimno (9:8), Jacobugath (9:9), Laman, Josh, Gad, and Kishkumen (9:10), since "there were none righteous among them" (9:11). He asks, "O all ye that are spared because you were more righteous than they, will ye not now return unto me, and repent of your sins, and be converted, that I may heal you?" (9:13) "Yea, verily, I say unto you, if ye shall come unto me, ye shall have eternal life. Behold, my arm of mercy is extended towards you, and whosoever will come, him will I receive, and blessed are those that come unto me." (9:14) "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name." (9:15)
After three days, the darkness clears. It is the time of the resurrection of Christ. The people gather to a land called Bountiful where stood a temple. A voice is heard from heaven which the people did not understand it at first, that "did pierce them that did hear to the center, insomuch that there was no part of their frame that it did not cause to quake; yea, it did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn." The voice is the voice of God Almighty, the very Eternal Father proclaiming His Son Jesus Christ the risen Lord.
The resurrected Christ descends from the sky. He stands before them and calls them to come and sees the wounds in His hands and side. He heals them and teaches them precepts that were to guide their Church.

