
The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck (Lo) is a serial of 12 comic book stories written and drawn by Don Rosa, lettered by Todd Klein (American editions), first published by the Danish publisher Egmont in the magazine "Anders And &amp; Co." from 1992–94 and later in English in "Uncle Scrooge" #285 through #296 (1994–96). The stories chronicle the in-universe biography of Scrooge McDuck before his introduction in 1947. The stories were later collected and published together in a single volume. Rosa later published additional stories which expanded on Scrooge's biography. These were released as "The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck Companion".
The story follows the main events of Scrooge's life between 1877 and 1947, including almost all references found in Carl Barks stories about Scrooge's life until 1947 but leaving some room for Rosa and other creators to add more details later. The comic also provides information on the backgrounds and origins of many characters related to Scrooge.
Don Rosa earned the Will Eisner Award for Best Serialized Story in 1995 for this work. The trade paperback collection was also a top vote-getter for the Comics Buyer's Guide Fan Award for Favorite Reprint Graphic Novel/Album for 1997.
After being out of print for several years with high demand, the book was reprinted under the BOOM! Studios label in two deluxe hardcover volumes.
The Finnish composer Tuomas Holopainen released a concept album based on the book, titled "Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge". Don Rosa illustrated the cover artwork for the album.
Chapter list.
Note: Chapters Zero, and all "in-between" chapters with "B" or "C" added to the numbers are not included in the softcover collection in North America. These chapters were later reprinted in a separate book published by Gemstone, titled "The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck Companion".
Historical figures appearing in the work.
Several notable historical figures appear in the series:
Other notable historical figures mentioned include:

