
Transport infrastructure in Brazil is characterized by strong regional differences and lack of development of the national rail network. Brazil's fast-growing economy, and especially the growth in exports, will place increasing demands on the transport networks. However, sizeable new investments that are expected to address some of the issues are either planned or in progress. It is common to travel domestically by air because the price is low. Brazil has the second highest number of airports in the world, after USA. 
Railways.
The Brazilian railway network has an extension of about 30,000 kilometers. It is basically used for transporting ores. Usually, the railway sector is treated in a secondary way in Brazil, due to logistical, economic or political difficulties to install more railways.
Railway links with adjacent countries.
International rail links exist between Brazil and Argentina, Bolivia and Uruguay.
Tramways.
Brazil had a hundred tramway systems. Currently, there are vintage tramways operating in Belém, Campinas, Campos do Jordão, Itatinga, Rio de Janeiro and Santos.
Highways.
Brazil has more than 1.7 million km of roads, of which 215,000 km are paved, and about 14,000 km are divided highways. The two most important highways in the country are BR-101 and BR-116. 
The country has a low rate of car ownership of 140 per 1000 people, however in comparison to the other developing economies of the BRIC group Brazil exceeds India and China.
Waterways.
50,000 km navigable (most in areas remote from industry or population) (2008)
Seaports and harbors.
The busiest port in the country, and the 2nd busiest in all of Latin America, losing only to the Port of Colón, is the Port of Santos. Other high-movement ports are the Port of Rio de Janeiro, Port of Paranaguá, Port of Itajaí, Port of Rio Grande, Port of São Francisco do Sul and Suape Port.
Merchant marine.
"total:" 136 ships ( or over) totaling /
"ships by type:" (1999 est.)
Airports.
The country has the second largest number of airports in the world, behind only the United States. São Paulo/Guarulhos, is the largest and busiest in the country. Brazil has 44 international airports, such as those in Rio de Janeiro, Brasília, Belo Horizonte, Porto Alegre, Florianópolis, Cuiabá, Salvador, Recife, Fortaleza, Belém and Manaus, among others.
Most international flights must go to São Paulo–Guarulhos International Airport or Rio de Janeiro–Galeão International Airport. Belo Horizonte is the main international airport outside Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo. A few go to Brasília, Recife, Natal, and just recently Fortaleza has accepted international flights.
In 2013 Brazil had the sixth largest passenger air market in the world.

