
The Titius–Bode law (sometimes termed just Bode's law) is a formulaic prediction of spacing between planets in any given solar system. The formula suggests that, extending outward, each planet should be approximately twice as far from the Sun as the one before. The hypothesis correctly anticipated the orbits of Ceres (in the asteroid belt) and Uranus, but failed as a predictor of Neptune's orbit. It is named after Johann Daniel Titius and Johann Elert Bode.
Later work by Blagg and Richardson significantly corrected the original formula, and made predictions that were subsequently validated by new discoveries and observations. It is these re-formulations that offer "the best phenomenological representations of distances with which to investigate the theoretical significance of Titius-Bode type Laws".
Formulation.
The law relates the semi-major axis formula_1 of each planet outward from the Sun in units such that the Earth's semi-major axis is equal to 10:
where formula_3 such that, with the exception of the first step, each value is twice the previous value.
There is another representation of the formula:
where formula_5
The resulting values can be divided by 10 to convert them into astronomical units (), resulting in the expression:
For the far outer planets, beyond Saturn, each planet is predicted to be roughly twice as far from the Sun as the previous object. Whereas the Titius-Bode law predicts Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto at about 10, 20, 39, and 77 , but the actual values are closer to 10, 19, 30, 40 .
This form of the law offered a good first guess; the re-formulations by Blagg and Richardson should be considered canonical.
Origin and history.
The first mention of a series approximating Bode's law is found in a textbook by D. Gregory (1715):
A similar sentence, likely paraphrased from Gregory (1715), appears in a work published by C. Wolff in 1724.
In 1764, C. Bonnet wrote:
In his 1766 translation of Bonnet's work, J.D. Titius added two of his own paragraphs to the statement above. The insertions were placed at the bottom of page 7 and at the top of page 8. The new paragraph is not in Bonnet's original French text, nor in translations of the work into Italian and English.
There are two parts to Titius's inserted text. The first part explains the succession of planetary distances from the Sun:
In 1772, J.E. Bode, then aged twenty-five, published an astronomical compendium, in which he included the following footnote, citing Titius (in later editions):
These two statements, for all their peculiar expression, and from the radii used for the orbits, seem to stem from an antique algorithm by a "cossist".
Many precedents were found that predate the seventeenth century. Titius was a disciple of the German philosopher C.F. von Wolf (1679–1754), and the second part of the text Titius inserted into Bonnet's work is in a book by von Wolf (1723), suggesting that Titius learned the relation from him. Twentieth-century literature about Titius–Bode law attributes authorship to von Wolf. A prior version was written by D. Gregory (1702), in which the succession of planetary distances 4, 7, 10, 16, 52, and 100 became a geometric progression with ratio 2. This is the nearest Newtonian formula, which was cited by Benjamin Martin and Tomàs Cerdà years before the German publication of Bonnet's book. Over the next two centuries, subsequent authors continued to present their own modified versions, apparently unaware of prior work.
Titius and Bode hoped that the law would lead to the discovery of new planets, and indeed the discovery of Uranus and Ceres – both of whose distances fit well with the law – contributed to the law's fame. Neptune's distance was very discrepant, however, and indeed Pluto – no longer considered a planet – is at a mean distance that roughly corresponds to that the Titius–Bode law predicted for the next planet out from Uranus.
When originally published, the law was approximately satisfied by all the planets then known – i.e., Mercury through Saturn – with a gap between the fourth and fifth planets. Vikarius (Johann Friedrich) Wurm (1787) proposed a modified version of the Titius-Bode Law that accounted for the then-known satellites of Jupiter and Saturn, and better predicted the distance for Mercury.
The Titius-Bode law was regarded as interesting, but of no great importance until the discovery of Uranus in 1781, which happens to fit into the series nearly exactly. Based on this discovery, Bode urged his contemporaries to search for a fifth planet. , the largest object in the asteroid belt, was found at Bode's predicted position in 1801.
Bode's law was widely accepted at that point, until in 1846 Neptune was discovered in a location that does not conform to the law. Simultaneously, due to the large number of asteroids discovered in the belt, Ceres was no longer a major planet. In 1898 the astronomer and logician C.S. Peirce used Bode's law as an example of fallacious reasoning.
The discovery of Pluto in 1930 confounded the issue still further: Although nowhere near its predicted position according to Bode's law, it was very nearly at the position the law had designated for Neptune. The subsequent discovery of the Kuiper belt – and in particular the object , which is more massive than Pluto, yet does not fit Bode's law – further discredited the formula.
A possible earlier version.
In 1760 Tomàs Cerdà taught a renowned astronomy course, which led to a textbook "Tratado de Astronomía".
In "Tratado de Astronomía", Cerdà obtaines the planetary distances from the orbital periods by applying Kepler's third law, with an accuracy of 10−3 . Scaling the average distance of the Earth from the Sun as 10, and rounding to whole numbers, one can express the geometric progression as
Using the uniform circular movement of Kepler's fictitious "mean anomaly", values of formula_8 corresponding to each planet's ratios may be obtained as
resulting in 1.82, 1.84, 1.86, 1.88, and 1.90, in which 
the ratio between Keplerian succession and Titius–Bode Law, would be a numerical coincidence. The ratio is close to 2, but increases harmonically from 1.82 .
The planet's average speed from formula_11 to formula_12 decreases moving away the Sun and differs from uniform descent in formula_13 to recover from formula_14 (orbital resonance).
Data.
The Titius–Bode law predicts planets will be present at specific distances in astronomical units, which can be compared to the observed data for several planets and dwarf planets in the solar system:
Blagg Formulation.
In 1913, Mary Blagg, an Oxford astronomer, re-visited the law. She analyzed the orbits of the planetary system and those of the satellite systems of the outer gas giants, Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus. She examined the log of the distances, trying to find the best 'average' difference.
Her analysis resulted in a different formula:
where:
Note that in her formulation, the Law for the solar system was best represented by a progression in 1.7275, "not" 2.
Blagg examined the satellite systems of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus, and discovered the same progression ratio (1.7275) in each.
Her paper appeared in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society for 1913, and was forgotten until 1953, when A. E. Roy at Glasgow University Observatory came across it while researching another problem. He noted that Blagg herself had suggested that her formula could give approximate mean distances of other bodies still undiscovered in 1913. Since then, six bodies in three systems examined by Blagg had been discovered: Pluto, Jupiter IX, X, XI, XII, and Uranus V.
Roy found that all six fitted very closely. In addition, another of Blagg's predictions was confirmed: that some bodies were clustered at particular distances.
Her formula also predicted that if a transplutonian planet existed, it would be at ~68 AU from the Sun.
Comparison of the Blagg formulation with observation.
Bodies in parentheses were not known in 1913, when Blagg wrote her paper. Some of the calculated distances in the Saturn and Uranus systems are not very accurate. This is because the low values of constant B in the table above make them very sensitive to the exact form of function f.
Richardson Formulation.
In 1945 D. E. Richardson independently arrived at the same conclusion as Blagg, that the progression ratio was "not" 2, but 1.728:
where formula_15 is an oscillatory function of formula_16, represented by distances formula_15 from an off-centered origin to angularly varying points on a "distribution ellipse".
Historical Inertia.
Nieto, who conducted the first modern comprehensive review of the Titius-Bode Law noted that "The psychological hold of the Law on astronomy has been such that people have always tended to regard its original form as the one on which to base theories." He was emphatic that "future theories must rid themselves of the bias of trying to explain a progression ratio of 2":
Theoretical explanations.
No solid theoretical explanation underlies the Titius–Bode law – but it is possible that, given a combination of orbital resonance and shortage of degrees of freedom, any stable planetary system has a high probability of satisfying a Titius–Bode-type relationship. Since it may be a mathematical coincidence rather than a "law of nature," it is sometimes referred to as a rule instead of "law." On the one hand, astrophysicist Alan Boss states that it is just a coincidence, and the planetary science journal "Icarus" no longer accepts papers attempting to provide improved versions of the "law." On the other hand, a growing amount of data from exoplanetary systems points to a generalized fulfillment of this rule in other planetary systems.
Orbital resonance from major orbiting bodies creates regions around the Sun that are free of long-term stable orbits. Results from simulations of planetary formation support the idea that a randomly chosen, stable planetary system will likely satisfy a Titius–Bode law.
Dubrulle and Graner showed that power-law distance rules can be a consequence of collapsing-cloud models of planetary systems possessing two symmetries: rotational invariance (i.e., the cloud and its contents are axially symmetric) and scale invariance (i.e., the cloud and its contents look the same on all scales). The latter is a feature of many phenomena considered to play a role in planetary formation, such as turbulence.
Natural satellite systems and exoplanetary systems.
Only a limited number of systems are available upon which Bode's law can presently be tested. Two solar planets have enough large moons, that probably formed in a process similar to that which formed the planets. The four large satellites of Jupiter and the biggest inner satellite (i.e., Amalthea) cling to a regular, but non-Titius–Bode, spacing, with the four innermost satellites locked into orbital periods that are each twice that of the next inner satellite. Similarly, the large moons of Uranus have a regular, non-Titius–Bode spacing. However, according to Martin Harwit
The new phrasing is known as “Dermott's law”.
Of the recent discoveries of extrasolar planetary systems, few have enough known planets to test whether similar rules apply. An attempt with 55 Cancri suggested the equation formula_18 and controversially predicts for formula_19 an undiscovered planet or asteroid field at 2 . Furthermore, the orbital period and semi-major axis of the innermost planet in the 55 Cancri system have been greatly revised (from 2.817 days to 0.737 days and from 0.038  to 0.016 , respectively) since the publication of these studies.
Recent astronomical research suggests that planetary systems around some other stars may follow Titius–Bode-like laws. Bovaird and Lineweaver applied a generalized Titius–Bode relation to 68 exoplanet systems that contain four or more planets. They showed that 96% of these exoplanet systems adhere to a generalized Titius–Bode relation to a similar or greater extent than the Solar System does. The locations of potentially undetected exoplanets are predicted in each system.
Subsequent research detected five planet candidates from the 97 planets predicted for the 68 planetary systems. The study showed that the actual number of planets could be larger. The occurrence rates of Mars- and Mercury-sized planets are currently unknown, so many planets could be missed due to their small size. Other possible reasons that may account for apparent discrepancies include planets that do not transit the star or circumstances in which the predicted space is occupied by circumstellar disks. Despite these types of allowances, the number of planets found with Titius–Bode law predictions was lower than expected.
In a 2018 paper, the idea of a hypothetical eighth planet around TRAPPIST-1 named "TRAPPIST-1i," was proposed by using the Titius–Bode law. TRAPPIST-1i had a prediction based exclusively on the Titius–Bode law with an orbital period of .
Finally, raw statistics from exoplanetary orbits strongly point to a general fulfillment of Titius–Bode-like laws (with exponential increase of semi-major axes as a function of planetary index) in all the exoplanetary systems; when making a blind histogram of orbital semi-major axes for all the known exoplanets for which this magnitude is known, and comparing it with what should be expected if planets distribute according to Titius–Bode-like laws, a significant degree of agreement (i.e., 78%) is obtained.

