
Theodosius I (; 11 January 347 – 17 January 395), also called Theodosius the Great, was Roman emperor from 379 to 395. He is best known for making Christianity the state religion of the Roman Empire and great architecture projects in Constantinople.
Theodosius was Spanish by birth and the son of a top-ranking general, Count Theodosius, on whose staff he served in several military campaigns. The younger Theodosius received promotions, but, upon his father's disgrace and execution in 376, retired to his Spanish estates. He was belatedly recalled by the emperor Gratian to take charge of Rome's eastern armies against the Goths after their defeat at the Battle of Adrianople in 378. Shortly afterwards, in 379, Gratian elevated Theodosius to the rank of "Augustus", but the new emperor's resources were not sufficient to drive the invaders out, and, in 382, the Goths were allowed to settle south of the Danube as autonomous allies of the Empire. In 386, Theodosius signed a treaty with the Sasanian Empire, which partitioned the long-disputed Kingdom of Armenia and secured a durable peace between the two powers.
He issued decrees that declared Nicene Christianity the official state religion of the Roman Empire, including the Edict of Thessalonica. He dissolved the order of the Vestal Virgins in Rome's Temple of Vesta, collected and spread laws that punished Roman paganism, Hellenistic religion, and Arianism though few of them were enforced. He neither prevented nor punished the destruction of prominent Hellenistic temples of classical antiquity, including the Temple of Apollo in Delphi and the Serapeum in Alexandria, yet most temple destruction was simply from the lack of funds available to maintain them. At his capital Constantinople he commissioned the honorific Column of Theodosius, the Theodosian Walls, and the Golden Gate, which are among the greatest surviving works of ancient Roman architecture. He revived classical art. His management of the empire was marked by heavy tax exactions, and according to the heavily biased Paulinus of Milan, by a court in which "everything was for sale". 
Theodosius married Gratian's half-sister Galla, daughter of Valentinian the Great (), and defeated the rebellion of Magnus Maximus () on behalf of his new brother-in-law, Valentinian II (). This victory came at heavy cost to the strength of the Empire. When Valentinian II died, Theodosius became the senior emperor, having already made his eldest son Arcadius his co-"augustus". Theodosius then defeated the usurper Eugenius (), in another destructive civil war. He died a few months later, without having consolidated control of his armies or of his Gothic allies. After his death, Theodosius's young and incapable sons were the two "augusti". Arcadius () inherited the eastern empire and reigned from Constantinople, and Honorius () the western empire. The two courts spent much of their effort in attacking each other or in vicious internal power struggles. The administrative division endured until the fall of the western Roman empire in the late 5th century.
Theodosius is considered a saint by the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Oriental Orthodox churches, and his feast day is on January 17.
Early life.
Theodosius the Great was born on 11 January 347. The "epitome de Caesaribus" places his birthplace at Cauca (Coca, Segovia) in Hispania. According to the traditional texts of the chronicle of Hydatius and Zosimus, he was born at ""Cauca" in "Gallaecia"". These texts are probably corrupted with interpolations, as Cauca was in fact not part of the province of Gallaecia, while according to Themistius, Claudian, and Marcellinus Comes, he was born at Italica in Hispania Baetica. These claims were probably fictitious and intended to connect Theodosius with the lineage of his distant predecessor Trajan (), who had came from Italica.
Thedosius's father was Theodosius the Elder and his mother was Thermantia.
Theodosius had a brother named Honorius, a sister referred to in Aurelius Victor's "De caesaribus" but whose name is unknown, and a niece, Serena.
Military career.
Theodosius accompanied his father, the "comes rei militaris", on his 368–369 campaign against the Franks, Scots, and Saxons to restore order and the rule of the emperors Valentinian I () and Valens () in Roman Britain, which had been threatened in 367 by the Great Conspiracy. They also defeated the usurpation in Britain by Valentinus. Previous to this in 366, Theodosius the Elder attacked and defeated the Alamanni in Roman Gaul; the defeated prisoners had been resettled in the Po Valley.
Theodosius the Elder was made "magister equitum" in 369, and retained the post until 375. Theodosius and his father campaigned against the Alamanni 370. The two Theodosi campaigned against Sarmatians in 372/373. The emperors' rule in Roman Africa was disrupted by the revolt of Firmus in 373. Theodosius the Elder moved to defeat the usurpation.
In about 373, Theodosius was made "dux" of the province of Moesia Prima. In 374, the Quadi and their allies the Sarmatians overran the province of Valeria in the praetorian prefecture of Illyricum. Theodosius drove the Sarmatians out of the Roman territory and then defeated the Quadi. He is reported to have defended his province with marked ability and success.
Theodosius the Elder fell from power in 375, and Theodosius the "dux" of Moesia Prima retired to his estates in the Iberian Peninsula, where he married Aelia Flaccilla in 376. Their first child, Arcadius, was born around 377. Pulcheria, their daughter, was born in 377 or 378. Theodosius had returned to the Danube frontier by 378, when he was appointed "magister equitum".
Accession.
After the death of his uncle Valens (), Gratian, now the senior "augustus", sought a candidate to nominate as Valens's successor. On 19 January 379, Theodosius I was made "augustus" over the eastern provinces at Sirmium. His wife, Aelia Flaccilla, was accordingly raised to "augusta". The new "augustus"'s territory spanned the Roman praetorian prefecture of the East, including the Roman diocese of Thrace, and the additional dioceses of Dacia and of Macedonia. Theodosius the Elder, who had died in 375, was then deified .
Reign.
Early reign: 379–383.
In October 379 the Council of Antioch was convened. On 27 February 380 Theodosius issued the Edict of Thessalonica, making Nicene Christianity the state church of the Roman Empire. In 380, Theodosius was made Roman consul for the first time and Gratian for the fifth; in September the "augusti" Gratian and Theodosius met, returning the Roman diocese of Dacia to Gratian's control and that of Macedonia to Valentinian II. In autumn Theodosius fell ill, and was baptized. According to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", Theodosius arrived at Constantinople and staged an "adventus", a ritual entry to the capital, on 24 November 380.
Theodosius issued a decree against Christians deemed heretics on 10 January 381. According to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", on the 11 January, Athanaric, king of the Gothic Thervingi arrived in Constantinople; he died and was buried in Constantinople on 25 January. On 8 May 381, Theodosius issued an edict against Manichaeism. In mid-May, Theodosius convened the First Council of Constantinople, the second ecumenical council after Constantine's First Council of Nicaea in 325; the Constantinopolitan council ended on 9 July. According to Zosimus, Theodosius won a victory over the Carpi and the Scirii in summer 381. On 21 December, Theodosius decreed the prohibition of sacrifices with the intent of divining the future. On 21 February 382, the body of Theodosius's father in law Valentinian the Great was finally laid to rest in the Church of the Holy Apostles. Another Council of Constantinople was held in summer 382. According to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", a treaty of "foedus" was reached with the Goths, and they were settled between the Danube and the Balkan Mountains.
Temporary settlement of the Gothic Wars.
The Goths and their allies (Vandals, Taifals, Bastarnae and the native Carpians) entrenched in the provinces of Dacia and eastern Pannonia Inferior consumed Theodosius's attention. The Gothic crisis was so dire that his co-Emperor Gratian relinquished control of the Illyrian provinces and retired to Trier in Gaul to let Theodosius operate without hindrance. It did not help that Theodosius himself was dangerously ill during many months after his elevation, being confined to his bed in Thessalonica during much of 379.
Gratian suppressed the incursions into dioceses of Illyria (Pannonia and Dalmatia) by Alathaeus and Saphrax in 380. He succeeded in convincing both to agree to a treaty and be settled in Pannonia. Theodosius was able finally to enter Constantinople in November 380, after two seasons in the field, having ultimately prevailed by offering highly favorable terms to the Gothic chiefs. His task was rendered much easier when Athanaric, an aged and cautious leader, accepted Theodosius's invitation to a conference in the capital, Constantinople, and the splendor of the imperial city reportedly awed him and his fellow-chiefs into accepting Theodosius' offers. Athanaric himself died soon after, but his followers were impressed by the honorable funeral arranged for him by Theodosius, and agreed to defending the border of the empire. The final treaties with the remaining Gothic forces, signed 3 October 382, permitted large contingents of barbarians, primarily Thervingian Goths, to settle in Thrace south of the Danube frontier. The Goths now settled within the Empire would largely fight for the Romans as a national contingent, as opposed to being fully integrated into the Roman forces.
First civil war: 383–384.
According to the "Chronicon Paschale", Theodosius celebrated his "quinquennalia" on 19 January 383 at Constantinople; on this occasion he raised his eldest son Arcadius to co-"augustus". Early 383 saw the acclamation of Magnus Maximus as "augustus" in Britain and the appointment of Themistius as "praefectus urbi" in Constantinople. On 25 July, Theodosius issued a new edict against gatherings of Christians deemed heretics.
Theodosius, unable to do much about Maximus due to his still inadequate military capability, opened negotiations with the Persian emperor Shapur III () of the Sasanian Empire. In an attempt to curb Maximus's ambitions, Theodosius appointed Flavius Neoterius as praetorian prefect of Italy.
Sometime in 383, Gratian's wife Constantia died. Gratian remarried, wedding Laeta, whose father was a "consularis" of Roman Syria. On the 25 August 383, according to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", Gratian was killed at Lugdunum (Lyon) by Andragathius, the "magister equitum" of the rebel "augustus" during the rebellion of Magnus Maximus . Constantia's body arrived in Constantinople on 12 September that year and was buried in the Church of the Holy Apostles on 1 December. Gratian was deified as .
On 21 January 384 all those deemed heretics were expelled from Constantinople. According to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", Theodosius received in Constantinople an embassy from the Sasanian Empire in 384. In summer 384, Theodosius met his co-"augustus" Valentinian II in northern Italy. Theodosius brokered a peace agreement between Valentinian and Magnus Maximus which endured for several years.
Middle reign: 384–387.
Theodosius's second son Honorius was born on 9 December 384 and titled "nobilissimus puer" (or "nobilissimus iuvenis"). The death of Aelia Flaccilla, Theodosius's first wife and the mother of Arcadius, Honorius, and Pulcheria, occurred by 386. She died at Scotumis in Thrace and was buried at Constantinople, her funeral oration delivered by Gregory of Nyssa. A statue of her was dedicated in the Byzantine Senate. In 384 or 385, Theodosius's niece Serena was married to the "magister militum", Stilicho. On 25 May 385, Theodosius repeated the ban on sacrifices that were done in order to predict the future.
In the beginning of 386, Theodosius's daughter Pulcheria also died. That summer more Goths were defeated, and many were settled in Phrygia. According to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", a Roman triumph over the Gothic Greuthungi was then celebrated at Constantinople. The same year, work began on the great triumphal column in the Forum of Theodosius in Constantinople, the Column of Theodosius. On 19 January 387, according to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", Arcadius celebrated his "quinquennalia" in Constantinople. By the end of the month, there was an uprising or riot in Antioch (Antakya). With a peace agreement with Persia in the Roman–Persian Wars came a division of Armenia.
Second civil war: 387–388.
The peace with Magnus Maximus was broken in 387, and Valentinian escaped the west with Justina, reaching Thessalonica (Thessaloniki) in summer or autumn 387 and appealing to Theodosius for aid; Valentinian II's sister Galla was then married to the eastern "augustus" at Thessalonica in late autumn. Theodosius may still have been in Thessalonica when he celebrated his "decennalia" on 19 January 388. Theodosius was consul for the second time in 388. Galla and Theodosius's first child, a son named Gratian, was born in 388 or 389.
On 10 March 388, Christians deemed heretics were forbidden from residing in cities. On 14 March, Theodosius banned the intermarriage of Jews and Christians. In summer 388, Theodosius recovered Italy from Magnus Maximus for Valentinian, and in June, the meeting of Christians deemed heretics was banned by Valentinian.
The armies of Theodosius and Maximus fought at the Battle of Poetovio in 388, which saw Maximus defeated. On 28 August 388 Maximus was executed. Now the "de facto" ruler of the Western empire as well, Theodosius celebrated his victory in Rome on June 13, 389 and stayed in Milan until 391, installing his own loyalists in senior positions including the new "magister militum" of the West, the Frankish general Arbogast.
Around July, Magnus Maximus was defeated by Theodosius at the Battle of Save; on 28 August, Magnus Maximus was executed by Theodosius. According to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", Arbogast killed Flavius Victor (), Magnus Maximus's young son and co-"augustus", in Gaul in August/September that year. "Damnatio memoriae" was pronounced against them, and inscriptions naming them were erased.
Massacre and its aftermath: 388–391.
The Massacre of Thessalonica (Thessaloniki) in Greece was a massacre of local civilians by Roman troops. The best estimate of the date is April of 390. The massacre was most likely a response to an urban riot that led to the murder of a Roman official. Sozomen wrote what most scholars, such as philosopher Stanislav Doleźal, see as the most reliable of the sources, the "Historia ecclesiastica" about 442; in it Sozomen supplies the identify of the murdered Roman official as Butheric, the commanding general of the field army in Illyricum (magister militum per Illyricum). According to Sozomen, a popular charioteer tried to rape a cup-bearer, (or possibly Butheric himself), and in response, Butheric arrested and jailed the charioteer. The populace demanded the chariot racer's release, and when Butheric refused, a general revolt rose up costing Butheric his life. Doležal says the name "Butheric" indicates he might have been a Goth, and that the general's ethnicity "could have been" a factor in the riot, but none of the early sources actually say so.
Sources.
There are no contemporaneous accounts. It wasn't until the fifth-century that church historians Sozomen, Theodoret the bishop of Cyrrhus, Socrates of Constantinople and Rufinus wrote the earliest accounts. These are moral accounts emphasizing imperial piety and ecclesial action rather than historical and political details. Further difficulty is created by these events moving into legend in art and literature almost immediately. Doležal explains that yet another problem is created by aspects of these accounts contradicting one another to the point of being mutually exclusive. Nonetheless, most classicists accept at least the basic account of the massacre, although they continue to dispute when it happened, who was responsible for it, what motivated it, and what impact it had on subsequent events.
Theodosius' role.
Theodosius was not in Thessalonica when the massacre occurred. The court was in Milan. Several scholars, such as historian G. W. Bowersock and authors Stephen Williams and Gerard Friell, think that Theodosius ordered the massacre in an excess of "volcanic anger". McLynn also puts all the blame on the Emperor as does the less dependable fifth century historian, Theodoret. Other scholars, such as historians Mark Hebblewhite and N. Q. King, do not agree. Peter Brown, points to the empire's established process of decision making, which required the emperor "to listen to his ministers" before acting. There is some indication Theodosius did listen to his counselors but received bad or misleading advice. 
J. F. Matthews argues that the Emperor first tried to punish the city by selective executions. Peter Brown concurs: "As it was, what was probably planned as a selective killing ... got out of hand". Doleźal says Sozomen is very specific in saying that in response to the riot, the soldiers made random arrests in the hippodrome to perform a few public executions as a demonstration of imperial disfavor, but the citizenry objected. Doleźal suggests, "The soldiers, realizing that they were surrounded by angry citizens, perhaps panicked ... and ...forcibly cleared the hippodrome at the cost of several thousands of lives of local inhabitants". McLynn says Theodosius was “unable to impose discipline upon the faraway troops" and covered that failure by taking responsibility for the massacre on himself, declaring he had given the order then countermanded it too late to stop it.
Ambrose, the bishop of Milan and one of Theodosius' many counselors, was away from court. After being informed of events concerning Thessalonica, he wrote Theodosius a letter offering what McLynn calls a different way for the emperor to "save face" and restore his public image. Ambrose urges a semi-public demonstration of penitence, telling the emperor he will not give Theodosius communion until this is done. Wolf Liebeschuetz says "Theodosius duly complied and came to church without his imperial robes, until Christmas, when Ambrose openly admitted him to communion". 
Washburn says the image of the mitered prelate braced in the door of the cathedral in Milan blocking Theodosius from entering is a product of the imagination of Theodoret who wrote of the events of 390 "using his own ideology to fill the gaps in the historical record". Peter Brown also says there was no dramatic encounter at the church door. McLynn states that "the encounter at the church door has long been known as a pious fiction". Wolfe Liebeschuetz says Ambrose advocated a course of action which avoided the kind of public humiliation Theodoret describes, and that is the course Theodosius chose.
Aftermath.
According to the early twentieth century historian Henry Smith Williams, history's assessment of Theodosius' character has been stained by the massacre of Thessalonica for centuries. Williams describes Theodosius as a virtuous-minded, courageous man, who was vigorous in pursuit of any important goal, but through contrasting the "inhuman massacre of the people of Thessalonica" with "the generous pardon of the citizens of Antioch" after civil war, Williams also concludes Theodosius was "hasty and choleric". It is only modern scholarship that has begun disputing Theodosius' responsibility for those events. 
From the time Edward Gibbon wrote his "Rise and Fall of the Roman Empire", Ambrose' action after–the–fact has been cited as an example of the church's dominance over the state in Antiquity. Alan Cameron says "the assumption is so widespread it would be superfluous to cite authorities. But there is not a shred of evidence for Ambrose exerting any such influence over Theodosius". Brown says Ambrose was just one–among–many advisors, and Cameron says there is no evidence Theodosius favored him above anyone else. 
By the time of the Thessalonican affair, Ambrose, an aristocrat and former governor, had been a bishop for 16 years, and during his episcopate, had seen the death of three emperors before Theodosius. These produced significant political storms, yet Ambrose held his place using what McLynn calls his "considerable qualities [and] considerable luck" to survive. Theodosius was in his 40s, had been emperor for 11 years, had temporarily settled the Gothic wars, and won two civil wars. As a Latin speaking Nicene western leader of the Greek largely Arian East, Boniface Ramsey says he had already left an indelible mark on history.
McLynn asserts that the relationship between Theodosius and Ambrose transformed into myth within a generation of their deaths. He also observes that the documents revealing the relationship between these two formidable men do not show the personal friendship the legends portray. Instead, those documents read more as negotiations between the institutions the men represent: the Roman State and the Italian Church.
Third civil war: 392–394.
On 15 May 392, Valentinian II died at Vienna in Gaul (Vienne), either by suicide or as part of a plot by the "magister militum" Arbogast. Valentinian had quarrelled publicly with Arbogast, and was found hanged in his room. Arbogast announced that this had been a suicide. He was deified with the .
Theodosius was then sole adult emperor, reigning with his son Arcadius. Arbogast was unable to assume the role of emperor because of his non-Roman background. Instead, on 22 August at the behest of Arbogast, a "magister scrinii" and "vir clarissimus", Eugenius, was acclaimed "augustus" at Lugdunum. Eugenius made some limited concessions to the Roman religion; like Maximus he sought Theodosius's recognition in vain. On 8 November 392, all cult worship of the gods was forbidden by Theodosius.
According to Polemius Silvius, Theodosius raised his second son Honorius to "augustus" on 23 January 393. He cited Eugenius's illegitimacy. 393 was the year of Theodosius's third consulship. On 29 September 393, Theodosius issued a decree for the protection of Jews. According to Zosimus, at the end of April 394, Theodosius's wife Galla died. On 1 August, a colossal statue of Theodosius was dedicated in Constantinople's Forum of Theodosius, an event recorded in the "Chronicon Paschale".
In the last years of Theodosius's reign, one of the emerging leaders of the Goths, named Alaric, participated in Theodosius's campaign against Eugenius in 394, only to resume his rebellious behavior against Theodosius's son and eastern successor, Arcadius, shortly after Theodosius' death.
Theodosius had gathered a large army, including the Goths whom he had settled in the eastern empire as "foederati", as well as Caucasian and Saracen auxiliaries, and marched against Eugenius. According to Socrates Scholasticus, Theodosius defeated Eugenius at the Battle of the Frigidus (the Vipava) on 6 September 394.
The battle began on 5 September 394, with Theodosius' full frontal assault on Eugenius's forces. In Theodosius's camp, the loss of the day decreased morale. It is said by Theodoret that Theodosius was visited by two "heavenly riders all in white" who gave him courage. The next day, the battle began again and Theodosius's forces were aided by a natural phenomenon known as the Bora, which can produce hurricane-strength winds. The Bora blew directly against the forces of Eugenius and disrupted the line. Eugenius's camp was stormed; Eugenius was captured and soon after executed. On 8 September, Arbogast killed himself.
According to Socrates, on 1 January 395, Honorius arrived in Mediolanum and a victory celebration was held there.
Death.
Theodosius suffered from a disease involving severe edema, in Milan. According to the "Consularia Constantinopolitana", Theodosius died in Mediolanum on 17 January 395. His funeral was held there on 25 February. Ambrose delivered a panegyric titled "De obitu Theodosii" in the presence Stilicho and Honorius in which Ambrose praised the suppression of paganism by Theodosius.
His body transferred to Constantinople, where according to the "Chronicon Paschale" he was buried on 8 November 395 in the Church of the Holy Apostles. He was deified . He was interred in a porphyry sarcophagus that was described in the 10th century by Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in his work "De Ceremoniis".
Art patronage.
According to art historian David Wright, art of the era around the year 400 reflects optimism amongst the traditional polytheists. This is likely connected to what Ine Jacobs calls a renaissance of classical styles of art in the Theodosian period (AD 379- 45) often referred to in modern scholarship as the "Theodosian renaissance". 
According to Armin Wirsching, two obelisks were shipped by the Romans from Karnak to Alexandria in 13/12 BC. In 357, Constantuis II had one (that became known as the Lateran obelisk) shipped to Rome. Wirsching says the Romans had previously watched and learned from the Egyptians how to transport such large heavy objects, so they constructed "a special sea‐going version of the Nile vessels ... – a double‐ship with three hulls". In 390, Theodosius oversaw the removal of the other to Constantinople.Linda Safran says that relocating the obelisk was motivated by Theodosius' victory over "the tyrants" (most likely Maximus Magnus and his son Victor). It is now known as the obelisk of Theodosius and still stands in the Hippodrome of Constantinople, the long Roman circus that was, at one time, the centre of Constantinople's public life. Re-erecting the monolith was a challenge for the technology that had been honed in the construction of siege engines. 
The obelisk's white marble base is entirely covered with bas-reliefs documenting Theodosius' imperial household and the engineering feat of removing it to Constantinople. Theodosius and the imperial family are separated from the nobles among the spectators in the imperial box, with a cover over them as a mark of their status. From the perspective of style, it has served as "the key monument in identifying a so-called Theodosian court style, which is usually described as a "renaissance" of earlier Roman classicism". The "Forum Tauri" in Constantinople was renamed and redecorated as the Forum of Theodosius, including a column and a triumphal arch in his honour. The "missorium" of Theodosius, the city of Aprodisias' statue of the emperor, the obelisk's base, the columns of Theodosius and Arcadius, and the dyptich of Probus were all commissioned by the court and reflect a similar renaissance of classicism.
Religious policy.
Arianism and orthodoxy.
John Kaye says the Arian controversy, concerning the nature of the divine trinity, and its accompanying struggles for political influence, started in Alexandria before the reign of Constantine the Great between bishop Arius of Alexandria, and bishop Alexander of Constantinople. 
Constantine had tried to settle the issues at the Council of Nicaea, but as Arnold Hugh Martin Jones states: "The rules laid down at Nicaea were not universally accepted". 
Arius had asserted that God the Father had created the Son. This would make the Son a lesser being, because even though "the Son was before all eternity, he was not eternal"; he'd had a beginning. Father and Son were, therefore, similar but not of the same essence. This christology, which was contrary to traditional orthodoxy, quickly spread through Egypt and Libya and the other Roman provinces. Bishops engaged in "wordy warfare," and the people divided into parties, sometimes demonstrating in the streets in support of one side or the other. 
At the center of the controversy was Athanasius who became the "champion of orthodoxy" after Alexander died. To Athanasius, Arius' interpretation of Jesus' nature (Homoiousian) could not explain how Jesus could accomplish the redemption of humankind which is the foundational principle of Christianity. "According to Athanasius, God had to become human so that humans could become divine ... That led him to conclude that the divine nature in Jesus was identical to that of the Father, and that Father and Son have the same substance" ("homoousios"). Athanasius' teaching was a major influence in the West, especially on Theodosius I. 
On 27 February 380, together with Gratian and Valentinian II, Theodosius issued the decree "Cunctos populos", the Edict of Thessalonica, recorded in the Codex Theodosianus . This declared Nicene Trinitarian Christianity to be the only legitimate imperial religion and the only one entitled to call itself Catholic; non-Christian religions or those who did not support the Trinity, he described as "foolish madmen". He also ended official state support for the traditional polytheist religions and customs.
On 26 November 380, two days after he had arrived in Constantinople, Theodosius expelled the Homoian bishop, Demophilus of Constantinople, and appointed Meletius patriarch of Antioch, and Gregory of Nazianzus, one of the Cappadocian Fathers from Cappadocia (today in Turkey), patriarch of Constantinople. Theodosius had just been baptized, by bishop Ascholius of Thessalonica, during a severe illness. According to Robinson Thornton, Theodosius began taking steps to repress Arianism immediately after his baptism in 380.
In May 381, Theodosius summoned a new ecumenical council at Constantinople to repair the schism between East and West on the basis of Nicene orthodoxy. The council went on to define orthodoxy, including the Third Person of the Trinity, the Holy Spirit, as equal to the Father and 'proceeding' from Him. The council also "condemned the Apollonarian and Macedonian heresies, clarified jurisdictions of the bishops according to the civil boundaries of dioceses, and ruled that Constantinople was second in precedence to Rome."
Policy towards paganism.
Theodosius did not act to prevent the closure or damage of many temples, holy sites, images and objects of piety. He forbade all forms of sacrifice. No governor was to even approach a temple for the purpose of worship. The eternal fire in the Temple of Vesta in the Roman Forum was extinguished and the Vestal Virgins disbanded. All practices of divination, auspices and witchcrafting were to be punished. In 385, he issued a law severely punishing the reading of entrails. He turned pagan holidays into workdays. Nevertheless, many scholars, such as Cameron and Hebblewhite, say that Theodosius did not pursue an active and sustained policy against the traditional cults. Throughout most of his reign, Theodosius essentially followed the religious policy of his predecessors, allowing pagan practices to be performed publicly and temples to remain open, while forbidding animal sacrifices, divination and magic. 
Cameron says Theodosius may even have attempted to conciliate the polytheists by appointing a pagan to replace the aggressively anti-pagan praetorian prefect Maternus Cynegius after he died in 388. Between 389 and 391 the emperor gave many important administrative offices in Italy to non-Christian members of the senatorial aristocracy (though he refused their requests to restore the Altar of Victory to the Roman Senate House). Finally, Theodosius nominated the last pair of pagan consuls in Roman history, Tatianus and Symmachus, in 391. 
Some scholars say Theodosius may have discontinued the ancient Olympic Games, whose last recorded celebration was in 393, though archeological evidence indicates that some games were still held after this date. Others, such as classicist Ingomar Hamlet, say that, contrary to popular myth, Theodosius did not ban the Olympic games. indicates there are several reasons to conclude the Olympic games continued after Theodosius I, and came to an end under Theodosius II, by accident, instead. There are two extant scholia on Lucian that connect the end of the games with a fire that burned down the temple of the Olympian Zeus during Theodosius II's reign.
Temple destruction.
According to Bayliss, the most destructive conflict between pagans and Christians of the late antique era took place in the diocese of Oriens, under Theodosius' prefect Maternus Cynegius. Garth Fowden says Cynegius did not limit himself to Theodosius' official policy. Instead, Cynegius apparently commissioned temple destruction, even employing the military under his command for this purpose, assisted by monks who proceeded to fall on temples all over Syria, the Euphrates frontier, and Phoenicia. Christopher Haas says Cynegius oversaw temple closings, the prohibition of sacrifices, and the destruction of temples in Osrhoene, Carrhae, and Beroea, while Marcellus of Apamea took advantage of the situation to destroy the temple of Zeus in his town. Brown says Libanius wrote "this black robed tribe" were acting outside the law, but Theodosius passively legitimized their violence by listening to them instead of correcting them. However, in 388 at Callinicum, (modern Raqqa in Syria), the bishop and monks from the area, burned a Jewish synagogue to the ground, and Theodosius responded, "The monks commit many atrocities" and ordered them to pay to rebuild it. 
Peter Brown says that in 392, inspired by the mood created by Cynegius, Theophilus of Alexandria staged a procession ridiculing statues of pagan gods. Political complications turned it into a riot, and the philosopher Hypatia was killed and the unique Serapium was destroyed. says the reign of Theodosius opens the period when the persecution of pagans and their temples was undoubtedly at its peak. Gilbert Grindle (1892) references Zosimus as saying Theodosius ordered Cynegius (Zosimus 4.37) to permanently close down the temples and forbade the worship of the deities throughout Egypt. Gibbon also says Theodosius either authorized or participated in the destruction of temples, holy sites, images and objects of reverence throughout the empire. It is Fowder's view that Zosimus's statement is an exaggeration – "Libanius gives no hint of this, and even implies the contrary". Fowder adds that there is no evidence of any desire on the part of the emperor to institute a systematic destruction of temples anywhere in the Theodosian Code.
The archaeological evidence for the violent destruction of temples around the Mediterranean is limited to a handful of sites. Archaeologist Luke Lavan says that, if one accepts all claims, even the most dubious ones, concerning destruction of pagan shrines and temples in Gaul, that only 2.4% of all the known temples were destroyed there by violence. In Africa, the city of Cyrene has good evidence of the burning of several temples; Asia Minor has produced one weak possibility; in Greece the only strong candidate may relate to a barbarian raid instead of Christians. Egypt has produced no archaeologically-confirmed temple destructions from this period except the Serapeum. In Italy there is one; Britain has the most with 2 out of 40 temples.
Trombley and MacMullen say part of what creates this discrepancy are details in the historical sources that are so often ambiguous or unclear. For example, Bayliss observes that the Roman historian
Theodosian decrees.
According to the Cambridge Ancient History, the Theodosian Law Code is a set of laws, originally dated from Constantine to Theodosius I, that were gathered together, organized by theme, and reissued throughout the empire in 438. Jill Harries and Ian S. Wood explain that, in their original forms, these laws were created by different emperors and governors to resolve the issues of a particular place at a particular time. They were not intended as general laws. Local politics and culture had produced divergent attitudes, and as a result, these laws present a series of conflicting opinions: for example, some laws called for the complete destruction of the temples and others for their preservation. French historian of Antiquity, , observes that "Ammianus Marcellinus" says this legal complexity produced corruption, forgery of rescripts, falsified appeals, and costly judicial delays.
The Theodosian Law Code has long been one of the principal historical sources for the study of Late Antiquity. Gibbon described the Theodosian decrees, in his "Memoires", as a work of history rather than jurisprudence. Brown says the language of these laws is uniformly vehement, and penalties are harsh and frequently horrifying, leading some historians, such as Ramsay MacMullen, to see them as a 'declaration of war' on traditional religious practices. It is a common belief the laws marked a turning point in the decline of paganism. 
Yet, many contemporary scholars such as Lepelly, Brown and Cameron, question the use of the Code, a legal document, not an actual historical work, for understanding history. Harries and Wood say, "The contents of the Code provide details from the canvas but are an unreliable guide, in isolation, to the character of the picture as a whole". Lavan says in "The Archaeology of Late Antique 'Paganism':" There is increasing evidence in language, society, religion, and the arts, as well as current archaeological research, that indicates paganism continued, relatively unmolested, for a full two centuries, and more in some places, after Christianity became official. The "Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity" says this is an argument for the ongoing vibrancy of Roman culture in late antiquity during and after the reign of Theodosius. Saradi-Mendelovici says that Christian hostility toward pagans and their monuments was far from the general phenomenon the law implies. According to Brown, with Christians comprising less than 20% of the overall population, local authorities were still mostly pagan and were lax in imposing anti-pagan laws, and even Christian bishops frequently obstructed their application. 
Cameron also downplays the effect of the emperor's limited legislation in the decline of the old religion, and writes that Theodosius did 'certainly not' ban paganism. In his 2020 biography of Theodosius, Mark Hebblewhite concludes that Theodosius never saw or advertised himself as a destroyer of the old cults; rather, the emperor's attitude was 'targeted, tactical, and nuanced', intended, above all, to ensure political stability and prevent religious discord.

