
United Airlines Flight 175 was a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Logan International Airport, in Boston, Massachusetts, to Los Angeles International Airport, in Los Angeles, California. On September11, 2001, the Boeing 767-200 operating the route was hijacked by five al-Qaeda terrorists and was deliberately crashed into the South Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City, killing all 65 people aboard and an unconfirmed number in the building's impact zone.
Approximately thirty minutes into the flight, the hijackers forcibly breached the cockpit and overpowered the captain and first officer, allowing lead hijacker and trained pilot Marwan al-Shehhi to take over the controls. Unlike Flight11, whose transponder was turned off, Flight175's transponder was visible on New York Center's radar, which depicted the aircraft's deviation from its assigned flight path for four minutes before air traffic controllers took notice at 08:51 EDT. Thereafter, they made several unsuccessful attempts to contact the cockpit. Unbeknownst to the hijackers, several passengers and crew members aboard made phone calls to family members and relayed information regarding the hijackers and casualties suffered by passengers and crew.
The aircraft crashed into Tower Two (the South Tower) of the World Trade Center at 09:03. The Flight175 hijacking was coordinated with that of American Airlines Flight 11, which struck the upper floors of Tower One (the North Tower) 17 minutes earlier. The crash of Flight175 into the South Tower was the only impact televised live around the world. The crash and subsequent fire caused the South Tower to collapse 56 minutes later at 09:59, resulting in hundreds of additional casualties. During the recovery effort at the World Trade Center site, workers uncovered and identified remains from some Flight175 victims, but many other body fragments could not be identified.
Background.
The team of hijackers on United Airlines Flight175 was led by Marwan al-Shehhi, from the United Arab Emirates. Shehhi obtained a commercial pilot's license while training in south Florida, along with Flight11 hijacker Mohamed Atta and Flight93 hijacker Ziad Jarrah. The hijackers on Flight175 included Fayez Banihammad, also from the UAE, and three Saudis: brothers Hamza al-Ghamdi and Ahmed al-Ghamdi, as well as Mohand al-Shehri. On August 13, 2001, Marwan al-Shehhi purchased two four-inch pocket knives from a Sports Authority store in Boynton Beach, Florida, while Banihammad bought a two-piece snap knife set at a Wal-Mart, and Hamza al-Ghamdi bought a Leatherman Wave multi-tool.
In early September 2001, the group of Flight175 hijackers arrived in Boston from Florida. Hamza al-Ghamdi and Ahmed al-Ghamdi arrived together on September7 and checked into the Charles Hotel in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The next day, they relocated to the Days Inn in Boston. On September 8, Fayez Banihammad and Mohand al-Shehri flew from Florida to Boston, where they checked into the Milner Hotel. Marwan al-Shehhi arrived in Boston on September9 and also stayed at the Milner Hotel, where he shared a room with Flight11 hijacker Mohamed Atta.
Flight.
Aircraft.
The flight was operated by a Boeing 767-200, registration number N612UA, built and delivered to United Airlines in February 1983, with capacity of 168 passengers (10 in first class, 32 in business class, and 126 in economy class). On the day of the attacks, the flight carried only 56 passengers and 9crew, which represented a 33 percent load factorwell below the average load factor of 49 percent in the three months preceding September11.
Passengers and crew (excluding hijackers).
The nine crew members included Captain Victor Saracini (51), First Officer Michael Horrocks (38), and flight attendants Robert Fangman, Amy Jarret, Amy King, Kathryn Laborie, Alfred Marchand, Michael Tarrou, and Alicia Titus. Saracini, a former Navy Pilot, had earned a reputation as the “Forrest Gump Captain” for entertaining delayed passengers with long passages of memorized movie dialogue. Horrocks was a former marine corps pilot who called home before the flight to urge his nine year old daughter to get up for school, "I love you to the moon and back." Excluding the hijackers, the passengers on the flight included 35 men, 12 women, and three children who were all under the age of 5; also among the passengers included Garnet "Ace" Bailey, the director of pro scouting for the Los Angeles Kings and a former National Hockey League player, and Mark Bavis, another former National Hockey League player and a scout for the Los Angeles Kings. Novelist Lisi Harrison had been scheduled to be on the flight but changed her plans at the last minute.
Boarding.
Hamza al-Ghamdi and Ahmed al-Ghamdi checked out of their hotel and called a taxi to take them to Logan International Airport. They arrived at the United Airlines counter in Terminal C at 06:20 Eastern Time and Ahmed al-Ghamdi checked in two bags. Both hijackers indicated they wanted to purchase tickets, even though they already had paper tickets. They had trouble answering the standard security questions, so the counter agent repeated the questions very slowly until satisfied with their responses. Hijacker pilot Marwan al-Shehhi checked in a single bag at 06:45, and the other remaining hijackers, Fayez Banihammad and Mohand al-Shehri, checked in at 06:53. Banihammad checked two bags. None of the hijackers were selected for extra scrutiny by the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System (CAPPS).
Shehhi and the other hijackers boarded Flight175 between 07:23 and 07:28. Banihammad boarded first and sat in first class seat 2A, while Mohand al-Shehri was in seat 2B. At 07:27, Shehhi and Ahmed al-Ghamdi boarded and sat in business class seats 6C and 9D, respectively. One minute later, Hamza al-Ghamdi boarded and sat in 9C.
The flight was scheduled to depart at 08:00 for Los Angeles. Fifty-one passengers and the five hijackers boarded the 767 through Terminal C's Gate 19. The plane pushed back at 07:58 and took off at 08:14 from runway 9, about the same time Flight11 was hijacked. By 08:33, the aircraft reached cruising altitude of 31,000 feet, which is the point when cabin service would normally begin. At 08:37, air traffic controllers asked the pilots of Flight175 whether they could see American Airlines Flight 11. The crew responded that Flight11 was at 29,000 feet, and controllers instructed Flight175 to turn and avoid the aircraft. The pilots declared that they had heard a suspicious transmission from Flight11 upon takeoff. "Sounds like someone keyed the mic and said 'Everyone, stay in your seats'," the flight crew reported. This was the last transmission from Flight175.
Hijacking.
Flight 175 was hijacked between 08:42 and 08:46, while Flight11 was just minutes away from hitting the North Tower. It is believed that hijackers Banihammad and al-Shehri forcibly entered the cockpit and attacked the pilots while the al-Ghamdis commanded passengers and crew to the aft of the cabin and Shehhi took over the controls. The first operational evidence that something was abnormal on Flight175 came at 08:47, when the plane's transponder signal changed twice within the span of one minute, and the aircraft began deviating from its assigned course. However, the air traffic controller in charge of the flight did not notice until minutes later at 08:51. Unlike Flight11, which had turned its transponder off, Flight175's flight data could still be properly monitored. Also, at 08:51, Flight175 changed altitude. Over the next three minutes, the controller made five unsuccessful attempts to contact Flight175 and worked to move other aircraft in the vicinity away from Flight175.
Near-collisions.
Around this time, the flight had a near midair collision with Delta Air Lines Flight2315 flying from Hartford to Tampa, reportedly missing the plane by only as air traffic controller Dave Bottiglia frantically instructed the Delta pilot to take evasive action. Bottiglia was also the first person in the control center to realize Flight175 had been hijacked. When he directed Flight175 to turn, the cockpit was unresponsive; instead, the aircraft accelerated and headed toward the Delta plane. He then commanded the Delta pilot to "Take any evasive action necessary." He added, "We have an airplane that we don't know what he's doing. Any action at all." Moments before Flight175 crashed, it avoided another near collision with Midwest Express Flight7, which was flying from Milwaukee to New York.
At 08:55 a supervisor at the New York Air Traffic Control Center notified the center's operations manager of the Flight175 hijacking. Bottigliawho was handling both Flight11 and Flight175remarked, "We might have a hijack over here, two of them." At 08:58, Flight175 was over New Jersey at 28,500 feet, heading toward New York City. In the five minutes from approximately 08:58 when Shehhi completed the final turn toward New York City until the moment of impact, the plane was in a sustained power dive, descending more than 24,000 feet in 5minutes 4seconds, at an average rate of over 5,000 feet per minute. Bottiglia reported he and his colleagues "were counting down the altitudes, and they were descending, right at the end, at 10,000 feet per minute. That is absolutely unheard of for a commercial jet."
Calls.
Flight attendant Robert Fangman and passengers Peter Hanson and Brian David Sweeney made phone calls from GTE airphones in the rear of the aircraft. Airphone records also indicate that Garnet Bailey made four phone call attempts to his wife.
At 08:52, Fangman called a United Airlines maintenance office in San Francisco and spoke with Marc Policastro. Fangman reported the hijacking and said the hijackers were likely flying the plane. He also said both pilots were dead and that a flight attendant had been stabbed. After a minute and 15 seconds, Fangman's call was disconnected. Policastro subsequently made attempts to contact the aircraft's cockpit using the Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) message system. He wrote, "I heard of a reported incident aboard your acft [aircraft]. Plz verify all is normal." He received no reply. 
Brian David Sweeney tried calling his wife, Julie, at 08:58, but ended up leaving a message, telling her the plane had been hijacked. He then called his parents at 09:00 and spoke with his mother, Louise. Sweeney told his mother about the hijacking and mentioned that passengers were considering storming the cockpit and taking control of the aircraft. Sweeney said he thought the hijackers might come back, so he might have to hang up quickly. He then said the hijackers were coming back and told his mother goodbye as he hung up.
At 08:52, Peter Hanson called his father, Lee Hanson, in Easton, Connecticut, telling him of the hijacking. Hanson was traveling with his wife, Sue, and their -year-old daughter, Christine, the youngest victim of September 11 attacks. The family was originally seated in Row 19, in seats C, D, and E; however, Peter placed the call to his father from seat 30E. Speaking softly, Hanson said the hijackers had commandeered the cockpit, a flight attendant had been stabbed, and that possibly someone else in the front of the aircraft had been killed. He also said the plane was flying erratically. Hanson asked his father to contact United Airlines, but Lee could not get through and instead called the police.
Peter Hanson made a second phone call to his father at 09:00:
It's getting bad, Dad. A stewardess was stabbed. They seem to have knives and Mace. They said they have a bomb. It's getting very bad on the plane. Passengers are throwing up and getting sick. The plane is making jerky movements. I don't think the pilot is flying the plane. I think we are going down. I think they intend to go to Chicago or someplace and fly into a building. Don't worry, Dad. If it happens, it'll be very fast... Oh my God... oh my God, oh my God.
As the call abruptly ended, Hanson's father heard a woman screaming.
Crash.
As the plane approached New York City, Shehhi would have seen the fire and smoke pouring from the North Tower in the distance. Writer Tom McMillan believes that the sight "must have thrilled him. Atta had struck; we can only guess that it was a final motivation for him to do the same." At 09:01, two minutes before impact as Flight175 continued its descent into Lower Manhattan, the New York Center alerted another nearby Air Traffic Facility responsible for low-flying aircraft, which was able to monitor the aircraft's path over New Jersey, and then over Staten Island and Upper New York Bay in its final moments. (Flight175 came in from the southwest, but turned right, then left into the South Tower.)
At exactly 9:02:59, Flight 175 crashed nose-first into the southern façade of the South Tower of the World Trade Center at approximately 590mph (950km/h, 264m/s, or 513knots), striking between floors 77 and 85 with approximately of jet fuel on board. The youngest person on Flight175 was -year-old Christine Hanson of Groton, Massachusetts, and the oldest was 80-year-old Dorothy DeAraujo of Long Beach, California. Hundreds more were killed within the tower and from its ensuing explosion, fires, and eventual collapse. It is estimated that 637 people were killed instantly or trapped at and above the floors of impact in the South Tower.
Based on the position of the aircraft from eyewitness statements and video footage, the aircraft was in a banking left turn in its final moments, as it appeared the plane might have otherwise missed the building or merely scraped it with a wing. Those who were on the left side of the plane would, therefore, have had a clear view of the towers approaching, with one burning, until the final moment of the flight.
By the time Flight 175 struck the South Tower, multiple media organizations were already covering the crash of Flight11, which had hit the North Tower 17 minutes earlier. The image of Flight175's crash was thus caught on video from multiple vantage points on live television and amateur video, while approximately a hundred cameras captured Flight175 in photographs before it crashed. Video footage of the crash was replayed numerous times in news broadcasts on the day of the attacks and in the following days, before major news networks put restrictions on use of the footage.
After the plane penetrated through the tower, part of the plane's landing gear and fuselage came out the north side of the tower and crashed through the roof and two of the floors of 45–47 Park Place, between West Broadway and Church Street, 600 feet (180 meters) north of the former World Trade Center. Three floor beams of the top floor of the building were destroyed, causing major structural damage.
Ed Ballinger, the United flight dispatcher, sent an (ACARS) message to United 175 at 9:03, right after it crashed, "How is the ride. Anything dispatch can do for you."
Collapse.
Unlike at the North Tower, initially, one of the three stairwells was still intact after Flight175 crashed into the South Tower. This was because the plane struck the tower offset from the center and not centrally as Flight11 in the North Tower had done. Only 18 people passed the impact zone through the available stairway and left the South Tower safely before it collapsed. One of them, Stanley Praimnath, was on the 81st floor, and his office suffered a direct hit. He witnessed Flight175 coming toward him. One of the wings sliced through his office and wound up wedged in a doorway about twenty feet away from him. No one escaped above the impact point in the North Tower.
Some people above the impact zone made their way upward toward the roof in hopes of a helicopter rescue. However, access doors to the roof were locked. In any case, thick smoke and intense heat prevented rescue helicopters from landing.
The South Tower collapsed at 09:59, after burning for 56 minutes.
Aftermath.
The flight recorders for Flight11 and Flight175 were never found. Some debris from Flight175 was recovered nearby, including landing gear found on top of a building on the corner of West Broadway and Park Place, an engine found at Church &amp; Murray Street, and a section of the fuselage landed on top of 5 World Trade Center.
During the recovery process, small fragments were identified from some passengers on Flight175, including a six-inch piece of bone belonging to Peter Hanson, and small bone fragments of Lisa Frost. In 2008, the remains of Flight175 passenger Alona Avraham were identified using DNA samples. Remains of many others aboard Flight175 were never recovered.
Shortly after September 11, the number for future flights on the same route was changed from 175 to 1525. Since then, United Airlines has renumbered and rescheduled all flights from Boston to Los Angeles. United Airlines Flight1820 now operates the Boston to LAX route, leaving at 08:05 and is operated by a Boeing 757-200. It was reported in May 2011 that United was reactivating flight numbers 175 and 93 as a codeshare operated by Continental, sparking an outcry from some in the media and the labor union representing United pilots. However, United said the reactivation was a mistake and said the numbers were "inadvertently reinstated", and would not be reactivated.
On April 26, 2013, a piece of the inboard wing flap mechanism from a Boeing 767 was discovered wedged between two buildings at Park Place.
The names of the victims of Flight175 are inscribed at the National September 11 Memorial &amp; Museum.
Nationalities of dead.
The 56 passengers (including the hijackers) and nine crew were from:

