
Ugo Nespolo (born 29 August 1941 in Mosso, Biella) is an Italian artist. Painter, sculptor, film-maker, journalist. Irony and play are how he expresses his creative eclectic language, rich in cultural references. He lives and works in Turin. 
Life and works.
Nespolo graduated at the Accademia Albertina di Belle Arti of Turin with Enrico Paulucci and obtained a degree in Modern Literature at the University of Turin, with a thesis on Semiology.
His career as an artist started in the 1960s and his work was influenced by Pop Art, which was becoming popular in Italy in those years, conceptual art, Arte Povera and Fluxus. he met and appreciated these movements during his frequent trips to the United States. After the first trip in 1967, he regularly visited the States, where he spent long periods especially during the 1980s. Since then, irony and transgression are part of his art and characterise Nespolo's work in the years to come.
Since 2010 he has been member of the Honour Committee of Immagine &amp; Poesia, an artistic literary movement founded in Turin, with the patronage of Aeronwy Thomas (Dylan Thomas's daughter). In 2016 he signed the pptArt Manifesto, an international art movement that promote many notable initiatives like the Corporate Art Awards.
Cinema.
In mid 1960s Nespolo started to work for artistic and experimental cinema. His first movie is "Grazie, mamma Kodak" in 1966. His friends and artists, such as Lucio Fontana, Enrico Baj, Michelangelo Pistoletto and others, appeared in his films. The film "A.G." (1968) documents the visit in Turin of Allen Ginsberg. In 2001 he directed "Film/a/TO", interpreted by Edoardo Sanguineti. Nespolo's films have been exhibited in institutions like the Beaubourg in Paris, the Philadelphia Museum of Modern Art, Warsaw's Filmoteka Polska and Ferrara's Galleria Civica d'Arte Moderna. The activity in this field has been particularly intense during the 1970s and the 2000s (decade). He has done about twenty films over forty years.
Applied arts.
In the 1980s, Nespolo made ceramics and blown glass objects, created over fifty posters for exhibitions and other events, did advertising campaigns – the ones for "Campari" and "Azzurra" are the most famous – and realised title sequences for shows on the Italian television RAI. In 2002, Nespolo was appointed artistic coordinator for the "Metropolitana di Torino", with the aim of realising the first "underground museum of modern art". Several underground stations are decorated with his glass etchings and images.
Theatre.
In 1986 Nespolo had the possibility of designing the stage sets for Ferruccio Busoni’s opera "Turandot" at Connecticut Grand Opera, Stamford, the first of several theatre works he made in the following years, such as the sets and costumes for Paisiello's "Don Chisciotte" at the Teatro dell'Opera di Roma in 1990 and for Donizetti's "L'elisir d'amore", a production for the Rome Opera, the Paris Opera and the Lausanne Opera, Liège and Metz in 1995. In 2007, he designed stage and costumes for Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" at the Festival Puccini 2007 in Torre del Lago.
Palio and traditions.
Nespolo was appreciated also for his work with "Palios". In 1998, he was committed the "Palio" for the "Giostra della Quintana", Ascoli Piceno. In 2000, he was awarded for his work for "Palio di Asti" and in 1991 and 2009 for the "Palio" of the "Giostra della Quintana" in Foligno. He was chosen to design the "Palio" ("Drappellone" or banner) at the "Palio dell'Assunta" in August 2007.
Selected exhibitions.
Nespolo's works covering his whole production have been presented or hosted in major national and international exhibitions, .
A selected list of exhibitions and venues is the following:
Filmography.
Nespolo's filmography includes:

