
Vietnamese cuisine encompasses the foods and beverages of Vietnam, and features a combination of five fundamental tastes () in overall meals. Each Vietnamese dish has a distinctive flavor which reflects one or more of these elements. Common ingredients include shrimp paste, fish sauce, bean sauce, rice, fresh herbs, fruit and vegetables. French cuisine has also had a major influence due to the French colonization of Vietnam. Vietnamese recipes use lemongrass, ginger, mint, Vietnamese mint, long coriander, Saigon cinnamon, bird's eye chili, lime, and Thai basil leaves. Traditional Vietnamese cooking is greatly admired for its fresh ingredients, minimal use of dairy and oil, complementary textures, and reliance on herbs and vegetables. Besides the fresh ingredients, a food culture research from Japan found that fish sauce or nuoc mam is an indispensable ingredient where it occupied 70% of Vietnamese dishes while 30% of soy sauce used in dishes. It is also low in sugar and is almost always naturally gluten-free, as many of the dishes are made with rice noodles, rice papers and rice flour instead of wheat.
Philosophical importance.
Vietnamese cuisine always has five elements which are known for its balance in each of these features. Many Vietnamese dishes include five fundamental taste senses (): spicy (metal), sour (wood), bitter (fire), salty (water) and sweet (earth), corresponding to five organs (): gall bladder, small intestine, large intestine, stomach, and urinary bladder.
Vietnamese dishes also include five types of nutrients (): powder, water or liquid, mineral elements, protein, and fat. Vietnamese cooks try to have five colours (): white (metal), green (wood), yellow (earth), red (fire) and black (water) in their dishes.
Dishes in Vietnam appeal to gastronomes via the five senses (): food arrangement attracts eyes, sounds come from crisp ingredients, five spices are detected on the tongue, aromatic ingredients coming mainly from herbs stimulate the nose, and some meals, especially finger food, can be perceived by touching.
Five-element correspondence.
Vietnamese cuisine is influenced by the Asian principle of five elements and "Mahābhūta".
Yin-yang balance.
The principle of yin and yang () is applied in composing a meal in a way that provides a balance that is beneficial for the body. While contrasting texture and flavors are important, the principle primarily concerns the "heating" and "cooling" properties of ingredients. Certain dishes are served in their respective seasons to provide contrasts in temperature and spiciness of the food and environment. Some examples are:
Cultural importance.
Salt is used as the connection between the worlds of the living and the dead. "Bánh phu thê" is used to remind new couples of perfection and harmony at their weddings. Food is often placed at the ancestral altar as an offering to the dead on special occasions (such as Lunar New Year). Cooking and eating play an extremely important role in Vietnamese culture. The word "ăn" (to eat) is included in a great number of proverbs and has a large range of semantic extensions.
Regional variations.
The mainstream culinary traditions in all three regions of Vietnam share some fundamental features:
While sharing some key features, Vietnamese culinary tradition differs from region to region.
In northern Vietnam, a colder climate limits the production and availability of spices. As a result, the foods there are often less spicy than those in other regions. Black pepper is used in place of chilies as the most popular ingredient to produce spicy flavors. In general, northern Vietnamese cuisine is not bold in any particular taste—sweet, salty, spicy, bitter, or sour. Most northern Vietnamese foods feature light and balanced flavors that result from subtle combinations of many different flavoring ingredients. The use of meats such as pork, beef, and chicken were relatively limited in the past. Freshwater fish, crustaceans, and mollusks, such as prawns, squids, shrimps, crabs, clams, and mussels, are widely used. Many notable dishes of northern Vietnam are crab-centered (e.g., "bún riêu"). Fish sauce, soy sauce, prawn sauce, and limes are among the main flavoring ingredients. Being the cradle of Vietnamese civilization, northern Vietnam produces many signature dishes of Vietnam, such as "bún riêu" and "bánh cuốn", which were carried to central and southern Vietnam through Vietnamese migration. Other famous Vietnamese dishes that originated from the north, particularly from Hanoi include "bún chả" (rice noodle with grilled marinated pork), phở gà (rice noodle with chicken), chả cá Lã Vọng (rice noodle with grilled fish).
The abundance of spices produced by Central Vietnam's mountainous terrain makes this region's cuisine notable for its spicy food, which sets it apart from the two other regions of Vietnam where foods are mostly not spicy. Once the capital of the last dynasty of Vietnam, Huế's culinary tradition features highly decorative and colorful food, reflecting the influence of ancient Vietnamese royal cuisine. The region's cuisine is also notable for its sophisticated meals consisting of many complex dishes served in small portions. Chili peppers and shrimp sauces are among the frequently used ingredients. Some Vietnamese signature dishes produced in central Vietnam are "bún bò Huế" and "bánh khoái".
The warm weather and fertile soil of southern Vietnam create an ideal condition for growing a wide variety of fruits, vegetables, and livestock. As a result, foods in southern Vietnam are often vibrant and flavorful, with liberal uses of garlic, shallots, and fresh herbs. Sugar is added to food more than in the other regions. The preference for sweetness in southern Vietnam can also be seen through the widespread use of coconut milk in southern Vietnamese cuisine. Vast shorelines make seafood a natural staple for people in this region. Some signature seafood dishes from southern Vietnam include "bánh khọt" and "bún mắm". 
The Mekong Delta cuisine relies heavily on fresh products which is abundant in the new land with heavy use of palm sugar, fermented fishes, seafoods and wild herbs and flowers. The history of the region being a newly settled area reflects on its cuisine, with "Ẩm thực khẩn hoang" or Settlers cuisine means dishes are prepared fresh from wild and newly-catched ingredients. The cuisine is also influenced by Khmer, Cham and Chinese settlers. 
The cuisine of the Northern and Central Highlands regions is influenced by tribal traditions, with items such as thắng cố (Hmong horse stew), dried meats, cơm lam and rượu cần.
Cooking techniques.
Some common Vietnamese culinary terms include:
Typical Vietnamese family meal.
A typical meal for the average Vietnamese family would include:
All dishes except individual bowls of rice are communal and are to be shared in the middle of the table. It is also customary for the younger people to ask/wait for the elders to eat first and the woman who sits right next to the rice pot serve rice for other people. People should "invite" the others to enjoy the meal (somehow similar to saying "Enjoy your meal"), in order from the elders to younger people. They also pick up food for each other as an action of care.
Feast.
A feast (, ) is a significant event for families or villages, usually up to 12 people for each table. A feast is prepared for weddings, funerals, and festivals, including the longevity wishing ceremony. In a feast, ordinary foods are not served, but boiled rice is still used.
A Vietnamese feast has two courses: the main course ( – salty dish) and dessert ( – sweet dish). All dishes, except for individual bowls of rice, are enjoyed collectively. All main course dishes are served simultaneously rather than one after another. The major dish of the main course is placed in the center of the tables, usually big pots of soup or a hot pot.
A basic feast () consists of 10 dishes: five in bowls (): (fried fish belly), (cellophane noodles), (bamboo shoot), (meatball), or (bird or chicken stew dishes) and five on plates (): (Vietnamese sausage), , or (boiled chicken or duck), (Vietnamese salad) and (stir-fried dishes). This kind of feast is traditional and is organized only in northern Vietnam. Other variations are found in central and southern Vietnam.
Four dishes essential in the feast of Tết are (spring rolls), (in northern Vietnam, refers to a spring roll called or ; in southern Vietnam, mainly refer to , fermented pork rolls), (stew dishes) and (noodle soup). At this time, the feast for offering ancestors includes sticky rice, boiled chicken, Vietnamese rice wine, and other preferred foods by ancestors in the past. Gifts are given before guests leave the feast.
Royal cuisine.
In the Nguyễn dynasty, the 50 best chefs from all over the kingdom were selected for the board to serve the king. There were three meals per day—12 dishes at breakfast and 66 dishes for lunch and dinner (including 50 main dishes and 16 sweets). An essential dish was bird's nest soup (). Other dishes included shark fin (), abalone (), deer's tendon (), bears' hands (), and rhinoceros' skin (). Water had to come from the well, the pagoda, the well (near the base of mountain), or from the source of the River. Rice was the variety from the imperial rice field. clay pots for cooking rice were used only a single time before disposal. No one was allowed to have any contact with the cooked dishes except for the cooks and board members. The dishes were first served to eunuchs, then the king's wives, after which they were offered to the king. The king enjoyed meals () alone in a comfortable, music-filled space.
Popularity.
Outside of Vietnam, Vietnamese cuisine is widely available in countries with strong Vietnamese immigrant communities, such as Australia, the United States, Canada, and France. Vietnamese cuisine is also popular in Japan, Korea, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Germany, UK, Poland, and Russia, and in areas with dense Asian populations.
Television shows featuring Vietnamese food have increased in popularity. Luke Nguyen from Australia currently features a television show, "Luke Nguyen's Vietnam", dedicated on showcasing and instructing how to cook Vietnamese dishes.
On "The Great Food Truck Race", a Vietnamese sandwich truck called Nom Nom Truck received the most money in the first five episodes.
Anthony Bourdain wrote: You don't have to go looking for great food in Vietnam. Great food finds you. It's everywhere. In restaurants, cafes, little storefronts, in the streets; carried in makeshift portable kitchens on yokes borne by women vendors. Your cyclo-driver will invite you to his home; your guide will want to bring you to his favorite place. Strangers will rush up and offer you a taste of something they're proud of and think you should know about. It's a country filled with proud cooks—and passionate eaters.
Gordon Ramsay visited Vietnam in his reality show "Gordon's Great Escape" - S02E02 (2011) and fell in love with the taste of the culinary here. Especially the dish called Hủ Tiếu Mì by Mrs. Dì Hai, prepped and served on a small boat in Cái Răng floating market, Cần Thơ. He even praised it as "The greatest dish I have ever eaten" when he brought it up as one of the dishes for the elimination challenge for the top 5 finalists of American MasterChef season 4 episode 21.
Vietnam is also well known for its street food.
The popularity of Vietnamese cuisine is seen all over YouTube. Many YouTubers vlog their adventures experiencing new Vietnamese street foods, rating and trying different Vietnamese dishes, and even creating their own spin-offs of Vietnamese delicacies.
Proverbs.
Many Vietnamese idioms reflect the sex-is-eating mapping:
Food in relation to lifestyle.
Vietnamese cuisine is reflective of the Vietnamese lifestyle, from the preparation to how the food is served. Going through long phases of war and political conflict, as well as cultural shifts, the vast majority of the Vietnamese people have been living in poverty. Therefore, the ingredients for Vietnamese food are often very inexpensive but nonetheless, the way they are cooked together to create a yin–yang balance makes the food simple in appearance but rich in flavor.
Due to economic conditions, maximizing the use of ingredients to save money has become a tradition in Vietnamese cooking. In earlier decades and even nowadays in rural areas, every part of a cow is used, from the muscle meat to the intestines; nothing is wasted. The higher quality cuts from farmed animals (cows, pigs) would be cooked in stirfry, soup or other dishes, while the secondary cuts would be used in blood sausages or soup. The same goes for vegetables like scallions: the leafy part is diced into small bits which are used to add flavor to the food while the crunchy stalk and roots are replanted.
 (fish sauce) is the most commonly used and iconic condiment in Vietnamese cooking. It is made from fermented raw fish and is served with most of the Vietnamese dishes. Vietnamese cuisines are not known for ingredients with top quality, but rather for the very inexpensive and simple scraps that are creatively mixed to create dishes with bold flavor. A traditional southern Vietnamese meal usually includes (plain white rice), (catfish in a clay pot), (sour soup with snakehead fish), and it would be incomplete without fish sauce served as a condiment. Dishes are prepared less with an appearance in mind but are served family-style to bring everyone together after a long day of work.
Despite being a small country in Southeast Asia, the foods from each region in Vietnam carry their distinctive and unique characteristics that reflect the geographical and living conditions of the people there. The traditional southern Vietnamese meal is made up of fresh ingredients that only the fertile Mekong Delta could provide, such as , and a wide range of tropical fruit like mangosteen, mango, and dragon fruit. The southern-style diet is very 'green', with vegetables, fish and tropical fruits as the main ingredients.
Central Vietnam is the region in which food is prepared with the strongest, boldest flavors. This region is constantly under harsh weather conditions throughout the year, so people there do not have as many green ingredients as others do in the north and south of Vietnam. Instead, the coastline around the central Vietnam area is known for its salt and fish sauce industries; these two condiments are central to their daily diets.
Northern Vietnamese cuisine has a strong Chinese influence, and its iconic dish is . While rice is a staple in the southern Vietnamese diet, the north has a preference for noodles. Owing to the drastic differences in climate and lifestyles throughout the three main regions of Vietnam, the foods vary. Northern Vietnamese cooking is the least bold and spicy in flavor compared to the foods from central and southern Vietnam.
Popular dishes.
When Vietnamese dishes are referred to in English, it is generally by the Vietnamese name without the diacritics. Some dishes have gained descriptive English names, as well.
Popular Vietnamese dishes include:
Noodle soups.
Vietnamese cuisine boasts a huge variety of noodle soups, each with distinct influences, origins and flavours. A common characteristic of many of these soups is a rich broth.
Bánh.
The Vietnamese name for pastries is "bánh". Many of the pastries are wrapped in various leaves (bamboo, banana, "dong", "gai") and boiled or steamed. One of the historic dishes, dating to the mythical founding of the Vietnamese state is square bánh ("bánh chưng"). As it is a savory dish and thus not a true pastry, bánh chưng and the accompanying "bánh dày" are laden with heaven and earth symbolism. These dishes are associated with offerings around the Vietnamese New Year ("Tết"). Additionally, as a legacy of French colonial rule and influence, bûche de Noël is a popular dessert served during the Christmas season.
Wraps and rolls.
"Bánh tráng" can be understood as either of the following:
Salads.
"Nộm" (Northern dialects) or "Gỏi" (Southern dialects) is Vietnamese salad; of the many varieties, the most popular include:
Preserved dishes.
"Muối" (literally means "salting") and "chua" (literally means "sour" or "fermenting") are Vietnamese term for preserved dishes. Monsoon tropical climate with abundant rainfall gives the Vietnamese a generous year-round supply of vegetables. Animal husbandry never occurred in large scale in Vietnamese history, therefore, preserved dishes are mainly plant-based pickled dishes. Seafood is often made into a fermented form called "mắm" like fish sauce. 
Mắm.
"Mắm" is a Vietnamese term for fermented fish, shrimp or other aquatic ingredients. It is used as main course, as an ingredient or as condiment. The types of fish most commonly used to make "mắm" are anchovies, catfish, snakeheads, and mackerels. The fish flesh remains intact (this is how it is different from "nước mắm"), and can be eaten cooked or uncooked, with or without vegetables and condiments. Fish sauce is literally called "mắm water" in Vietnamese and is the distilled liquid from the process of fermentation of mắm.
Fermented meat dishes.
"Nem chua", a Vietnamese fermented meat served as is or fried, is made from pork meat, coated by fried rice ("thính gạo"), mixed with pork skin and then wrapped in country gooseberry leaves ("lá chùm ruột") or "Erythrina orientalis" leaves ("lá vông nem"). The preservation process takes about three to five days.
Sausages.
Vietnamese sausage, "giò", is usually made from fresh ground pork and beef. Sausage makers may use the meat, skin or ear. Fish sauce is added before banana leaves are used to wrap the mixture. The last step is boiling. For common sausage, 1 kg of meat is boiled for an hour. For "chả quế", the boiled meat mixture will then be roasted with cinnamon.
Vegetarian dishes.
Vegetarian dishes in Vietnam often have the same names as their meat equivalents, e.g. "Phở Bò". But in restaurants with "« chay »" (vegetarian) sign in front, those dishes are served with tofu instead of meat. Nearly every soup, sandwich and street food has its vegetarian correspondent.
Sometimes you can also see notations like "phở chay", "bánh mì chay" (vegetarian sandwich) or "cơm chay" (vegetarian rice).
The vegetarian food in comparison the normal dishes are almost always cheaper, often it's half the normal price.
"Chay" restaurants are mostly frequented by religious Vietnamese people and are rarely found in touristic areas. Furthermore, vegetarian food is eaten to earn luck during special holiday and festival, especially during Lunar New Year where Vietnamese culture serve vegetarian food regardless of their religion.
Mứt.
Vietnamese use fruits in season. When the season is passing, they make candied fruit, called "ô mai" and fruit preserves, called "mứt". The original taste of "ô mai" is sour, sweet, salty, and spicy. The most famous kind of "ô mai" is "ô mai mơ", made from apricots harvested from the forest around Perfume Pagoda (Chùa Hương), Hà Tây Province. This "ô mai" consists of apricot covered by ginger, sugar, and liquorice root slivers.
Tofu.
Tofu ("đậu phụ") is widely used in Vietnamese cuisine. It is boiled, fried (sprinkled with ground shrimp or oil-dipped minced spring onion) or used as ingredient in a variety of dishes.
Other soybean products range from soy sauce ("nước tương"- usually light soy sauce), fermented bean paste ("tương"), and fermented bean curd ("đậu phụ nhự" or "chao") to douhua (soft tofu sweet soup- "tàu hũ nước đường", or "tào phớ").
Condiments and sauces.
Condiments.
Vietnamese usually use raw vegetables, "rau sống", or "rau ghém" (sliced vegetable) as condiments for their dishes to combine properly with each main dish in flavour. Dishes in which "rau sống" is indispensable are "bánh xèo" and hot pot. The vegetables principally are herbs and wild edible vegetables gathered from forests and family gardens. Leaves and buds are the most common parts of vegetables used. Most of the vegetables have medicinal value.
"Rau sống" includes lettuce, raw bean sprout, herbs, shredded banana flower, green banana, water spinach, mango bud and guava leaves.
Food colourings.
Traditionally, the colouring of Vietnamese food comes from natural ingredients, however today there's an increase in the use of artificial food dye agents for food colouring, in Vietnam.
Colourings can be absorbed by mixing ground colourings or colouring liquid or wrapping before boiling to get the extracts. When colouring dishes, the tastes and smells of colourings must also be considered.
Exotic dishes.
The use of ingredients typically uncommon or taboo in most countries is one of the quintessential attributes that make Vietnamese cuisine unique. While unusual ingredients can only be found in exotic restaurants in many countries, Vietnamese cuisine is deemed atypical in that the usage of these ingredients can play a customary role in daily family dishes regardless of social class.
A common and inexpensive breakfast dish that can be found in any wet market, balut ("hột vịt lộn") is a fertilized duck egg with a nearly developed embryo inside, which is boiled and eaten in the shell. It is typically served with fresh herbs: "rau răm" or Vietnamese coriander, salt, and black pepper; lime juice is another popular additive, when available. A more unusual version of balut dish—fetus quail ("trứng cút lộn")—is a snack favored by many Vietnamese students. Paddy crab and paddy snail are the main ingredients in "bún riêu ốc"—a popular noodle dish—and in some everyday soup dishes ("canh") and braised food ("món bung"). Family meals with silkworms ("nhộng"), banana flowers ("hoa chuối"), sparrows, doves, fermented fish and shrimp ("mắm cá", "mắm tôm", "mắm tép") are not rare sights. Seasonal favorites include ragworms ("rươi"), which are made into many dishes such as fried "rươi" omelet ("chả rươi"), fermented "rươi" sauce ('[mắm rươi"), steamed "rươi" ("rươi hấp"), stir-fried "rươi" with radish or bamboo shoot ("rươi xào củ niễng măng tươi hay củ cải").
Northern Vietnamese cuisine is also notable for its wide range of meat choices. Exotic meats such as dog meat, cat meat, rat meat, snake, soft-shell turtle, deer, and domestic goat are sold in street-side restaurants and generally paired with alcoholic beverages. A taboo in many Western countries and in southern Vietnam, consumption of dog meat and cat meat is common throughout the northern part of the country and is believed to raise the libido in men. Television chef Andrew Zimmern visited northern Vietnam in the 12th episode of his popular show "Bizarre Foods with Andrew Zimmern". Cobra beating heart and dried bones, silkworms, and bull penis are some of the dishes he sampled. He also tried porcupine.
Paddy mouse meat—barbecued, braised, stir- or deep-fried—is a delicacy dish that can be found in Southern Vietnamese rural areas or even high-end city restaurants.
Crocodiles were eaten by Vietnamese while they were taboo and off limits for Chinese.
Shark fins are imported in massive amounts by Vietnam.
Anthony Bourdain, the host chef of Travel Channel's "", wrote in April 2005: "...everything is used—and nothing wasted in Vietnam." Animal parts that are often disposed of in many Western countries are used fully in Vietnamese cooking. Organs, including lungs, livers, hearts, intestines and bladders of pigs, cattle, and chickens are sold at even higher prices than their meat. Chicken testicles and undeveloped eggs are stir-fried with vegetables and served as an everyday dish.
Many of the traditional northern Lunar New Year dishes such as "thịt đông", "giò thủ," and "canh măng móng giò" involve the use of pig heads, tongues, throats and feet. Pig and beef tails, as well as chicken heads, necks and feet, are Vietnamese favorite beer dishes. "Bóng bì", used as an ingredient in "canh bóng"—a kind of soup, is pig skin baked until popped. Steamed pig brains can be found almost everywhere. Also in the northern part of Vietnam, different kinds of animal blood can be made into a dish called "tiết canh" by whisking the blood with fish sauce and cold water in a shallow dish along with finely chopped, cooked duck innards (such as gizzards), sprinkled with crushed peanuts and chopped herbs such as Vietnamese coriander, mint, etc. It is then cooled until the blood coagulates into a soft, jelly-like mixture and served raw.
Coconut worms, or "đuông dừa", is a delicacy found widely in the Trà Vinh Province of Vietnam. They are the larvae form of the palm weevil and are eaten live within a salty fish sauce with chili peppers.
Historical influences.
Due to historical contact with China and thousand years of sinicization, Vietnamese cuisine shares many of its characteristics with Chinese cuisine. In culinary traditions, the Chinese introduced to Vietnam many dishes, including "vằn thắn"/"hoành thánh" (wonton), "xá xíu" ("char siu"), "há cảo" ("har gow"), "hủ tiếu" ("ka tieu"), "mì" (wheat noodles), "bò bía" ("popiah"), "bánh quẩy" ("youtiao"), mooncake and "bánh pía" (Suzhou style mooncake), "bánh tổ" ("nian gao"), "sủi dìn" ("tang yuan"), "bánh bò", "bánh bao" ("baozi"), "cơm chiên Dương Châu" (Yangzhou-fried rice), and "mì xào" (chow mein). The Vietnamese adopted these foods and added their own styles and flavors to the foods. Ethnic minorities in the mountainous region near the China–Vietnam border also adopted some foods from China. Ethnic Tày and Nùng in Lạng Sơn Province adopted "thịt lợn quay" (roasted pork) and "khâu nhục" (braised pork belly) from China. Some New World vegetables, such as chili peppers and corn (maize), also made their way to Vietnam from the Ming dynasty.
The French introduced baguettes to Vietnam, which were then combined with Vietnamese stuffing to become a popular fast food in Vietnam called "bánh mì" and known overseas as "Vietnamese baguettes", though different from the French counterpart in that the baguette is normally made entirely of rice flour. The French also brought to Vietnam onions, cauliflower, lettuce, potatoes, tarragon, carrot, artichoke, asparagus, and coffee.
The western introduced ingredients often being called with a name derived from a similar native Vietnamese ingredient, then adding the word "tây" (meaning "western"). Onions are called "hành tây" (literally "western shallots"), asparagus as "măng tây" (western bamboo shoots) and potatoes are called "khoai tây" (western yam) in Vietnamese, which reflect their origin before arriving in Vietnam. French-influenced dishes are numerous and not limited to: "sa lát" (salad), "pâté", "patê sô" (a Brittany pasty called "pâté chaud"), "bánh sừng trâu" (croissant), "bánh flan", "ya ua" (yogurt), "rôti" (rotisserie), "bơ" (butter), "vịt nấu cam" (duck à l'orange), "ốp lết" (omelette), "ốp la" ("œufs au plat"), "phá xí" (farcies), "bít tết" (beefsteak), "sốt vang" (cooking with wine), "dăm bông" ("jambon"), and "xúc xích" ("saucisse"). Due to influences from French colonization, the French Indochinese countries of Laos, Vietnam, and Cambodia have several shared dishes and beverages including baguettes and coffee. The French also introduced use of dairy products in Vietnamese-French fusion dishes.
Vietnamese cuisine also has influences from its neighbor Champa, Malaysia and Cambodia. The use of coconut milk and various central dishes such as "bánh khọt" were influenced by Cham cuisine. Spices including curries were also introduced to Vietnam by Malay and Indian traders. Though not common in the north, "cà ri" is a quite popular dish in central and southern Vietnam. The most common form is chicken curry and to a lesser extent, goat curry. Chicken curry is an indispensable dish in many social gathering events, such as weddings, funerals, graduations, and the yearly death anniversary of a loved one. Similar to Cambodia, curry in Vietnam is eaten either with the French baguettes, steamed rice, or round rice noodles (rice vermicelli). "Mắm bồ hóc" or prahok, adopted from ethnic Khmer in Southern Vietnam, is used as a central ingredient of a Vietnamese rice noodle soup called "bún nước lèo" which originated with ethnic Khmers in Vietnam and is not found in Cambodia. 
Due to contact with communist countries from Eastern Europe, the Vietnamese adopted dishes such as stuffed cabbage soup, "thịt đông" (Kholodets), "sa lát Nga" (Russian salad) and "bia Tiệp" (Czech beer).

