
The 2020s (pronounced "twenty-twenties", shortened to "the '20s") is the current decade of the Gregorian calendar that began on 1 January 2020, and will end on 31 December 2029.
As the decade began, the COVID-19 pandemic spread around the world, causing widespread social and economic disruption, all while global ecological crises continue to escalate.
Politics and conflicts.
Conflicts and peace.
The prominent wars of the decade include:
Terrorist attacks.
"Note: To be included, entries must be notable (have a stand-alone article) and described by a consensus of as "terrorism". They also must have 100 or more fatalities reported."
Political trends.
Deaths.
Former leaders Hosni Mubarak, Valery Giscard d'Estaing, John Turner, Daniel arap Moi, Pranab Mukherjee and Carlos Menem. Oman's Sultan Qaboos bin Said died on January 10, 2020.
Assassinations and attempts.
Prominent assassinations, targeted killings, and assassination attempts include:
Disasters.
Natural disasters.
Earthquakes and tsunamis.
"Note: This table is a chronological list of earthquakes reported with 7.5 or greater or that have reported at least 100 fatalities."
Floods, avalanches, and mudslides.
"Note: This section reports only floods with 200 or more deaths and avalanches and landslides involving 30 or more deaths."
Other natural events.
In 2020, a huge swarm of desert locusts threatened to engulf massive portions of the Middle East, Africa and Asia. In tandem with the COVID-19 pandemic, this posed major hazards to billions of people who might be affected. Although experts had thought the insects would die out during the dry season in December 2019, unseasonal rains caused the incursion to reach unanticipated and hazardous levels.
Economics.
Trade.
The World Trade Organization reported that trade growth had stagnated and that trade restrictions were increasing as the decade began. The sectors most affected by import restrictions were mineral and fuel oils (17.7%), machinery and mechanical appliances (13%), electrical machinery and parts (11.7%), and precious metals (6%). Regional trade agreements were found to be increasing.
The Brexit withdrawal agreement went into effect at the end of January 2020 with the UK completing its economic withdrawal from the EU at the end of that year. The United States, Mexico, and Canada signed the USMCA agreement, which came into effect on 1 July 2020.
Society.
Race.
The murder of George Floyd led to many protest and riots across the United States and internationally in 2020. The stated goal of the protest has been to end police brutality and racial inequality, and is closely linked with the Black Lives Matter movement. 
Gender.
24.3% of all national parliamentarians were women as of February 2019. 11 women were serving as Head of State and 12 as Head of Government in June 2019. 20.7% of government ministers were women as of January 2019. Katerina Sakellaropoulou became the first female president of Greece in January 2020, and Kamala Harris became the first female Vice President of the United States in 2021.
There are wide regional variations in the average percentages of women parliamentarians. As of February 2019, these were: Nordic countries, 42.5%; Americas, 30.6%; Europe excluding Nordic countries, 27.2; sub-Saharan Africa, 23.9; Asia, 19.8%; Arab States, 19%; and the Pacific, 16.3%. Rwanda has the highest number of women parliamentarians worldwide, 61.3% of seats in the lower house. About 26% of elected local parliamentarians are women.
Environmentalism.
The 2019–20 Australian bushfire season devastated the environment of Australia.
Culture.
Fashion.
Fashion trends of the early 2020s have been largely inspired by the 2000s. Wearing a decorative mask to prevent the disease COVID-19 from spreading was a fashion trend in the early 2020s.
Film.
Several films and other upcoming movies were released on streaming platforms instead of theatres due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Though few films were also released simultaneously on both theatrically and streaming platforms.
Television.
The 2020s has started off with the primary streaming services being Netflix, Amazon Prime, HBO Max, Hulu and Disney+. Additional streaming services such as Discovery+, Paramount+, and Peacock were being developed as well. Cable television and satellite television were continuing to fall out of popularity, and were no longer as prevalent as they were once in the 2010s and decades prior. In the 2020s, rebooting and reunion episodes of older shows became widespread, including "Animaniacs", "The Conners", "Saved By The Bell", HBO Max's "Friends: The Reunion" and "The Fresh Prince Of Bel Air Reunion", Paramount+'s new "Frasier", "iCarly", and "Rugrats". 
Music.
In 2020, TikTok became an important music platform on social media. Streaming on platforms such as Spotify, Amazon Music and Apple Music increased due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Festivals such as Coachella were cancelled because of the virus. The COVID-19 pandemic devastated the touring business.
Video games.
The ninth generation of consoles began in 2020 with the release of the Xbox Series X/S and PlayStation 5. The video game "Among Us" surged in popularity online in 2020; similarly, "Fall Guys" grew in popularity online shortly after it was released in August 2020.
The Nintendo Switch continued to see popularity among gamers. had sold over 31 million copies on the Nintendo Switch, making it the second best selling game on the Nintendo Switch. Its success has been attributed in part to its release amid global stay-at-home orders during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Architecture.
The SoFi Stadium was completed on 8 September 2020 and is a component of Hollywood Park, a master planned neighborhood in development. The stadium serves as a home to the Los Angeles Rams and the Los Angeles Chargers. SoFi Stadium is set to host Super Bowl LVI in February 2022. The stadium is also set to host the opening and closing ceremonies, soccer and archery in the 2028 Summer Olympics, which will be hosted in Los Angeles, California, United States Of America.
The Unity Tower was finally completed on 30 September 2020. The construction of the building originally started in 1975, but stopped permanently in 1981 because of economic constraints and political unrest at the time. Due to the unfinished building's resemblance to a skeleton, it was nicknamed after Skeletor, the arch-villain in "He-Man and the Masters of the Universe", which was popular in Poland at the time construction began.
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
2020 • 2021

