
In mathematics, particularly abstract algebra, an algebraic closure of a field "K" is an algebraic extension of "K" that is algebraically closed. It is one of many closures in mathematics.
Using Zorn's lemma or the weaker ultrafilter lemma, it can be shown that every field has an algebraic closure, and that the algebraic closure of a field "K" is unique up to an isomorphism that fixes every member of "K". Because of this essential uniqueness, we often speak of "the" algebraic closure of "K", rather than "an" algebraic closure of "K".
The algebraic closure of a field "K" can be thought of as the largest algebraic extension of "K".
To see this, note that if "L" is any algebraic extension of "K", then the algebraic closure of "L" is also an algebraic closure of "K", and so "L" is contained within the algebraic closure of "K".
The algebraic closure of "K" is also the smallest algebraically closed field containing "K",
because if "M" is any algebraically closed field containing "K", then the elements of "M" that are algebraic over "K" form an algebraic closure of "K".
The algebraic closure of a field "K" has the same cardinality as "K" if "K" is infinite, and is countably infinite if "K" is finite.
Existence of an algebraic closure and splitting fields.
Let formula_1 be the set of all monic irreducible polynomials in "K"["x"].
For each formula_2, introduce new variables formula_3 where formula_4.
Let "R" be the polynomial ring over "K" generated by formula_5 for all formula_6 and all formula_7. Write
with formula_9.
Let "I" be the ideal in "R" generated by the formula_10. Since "I" is strictly smaller than "R",
Zorn's lemma implies that there exists a maximal ideal "M" in "R" that contains "I".
The field "K"1="R"/"M" has the property that every polynomial formula_11 with coefficients in "K" splits as the product of formula_12 and hence has all roots in "K"1. In the same way, an extension "K"2 of "K"1 can be constructed, etc. The union of all these extensions is the algebraic closure of "K", because any polynomial with coefficients in this new field has its coefficients in some "K"n with sufficiently large "n", and then its roots are in "K"n+1, and hence in the union itself. 
It can be shown along the same lines that for any subset "S" of "K"["x"], there exists a splitting field of "S" over "K".
Separable closure.
An algebraic closure "Kalg" of "K" contains a unique separable extension "Ksep" of "K" containing all (algebraic) separable extensions of "K" within "Kalg". This subextension is called a separable closure of "K". Since a separable extension of a separable extension is again separable, there are no finite separable extensions of "Ksep", of degree &gt; 1. Saying this another way, "K" is contained in a "separably-closed" algebraic extension field. It is unique (up to isomorphism).
The separable closure is the full algebraic closure if and only if "K" is a perfect field. For example, if "K" is a field of characteristic "p" and if "X" is transcendental over "K", formula_13 is a non-separable algebraic field extension.
In general, the absolute Galois group of "K" is the Galois group of "Ksep" over "K".

