
The Apostles' Creed (Latin: "Symbolum Apostolorum" or "Symbolum Apostolicum"), sometimes titled the Apostolic Creed or the Symbol of the Apostles is a Christian creed or "symbol of faith".
It most likely originates in 5th-century Gaul, as a development of the Old Roman Symbol, the old Latin creed of the 4th century. It has been in liturgical use in the Latin rite since the 8th century, and by extension in the various modern branches of Western Christianity, including the modern liturgy and catechesis of the Roman Catholic Church, Lutheranism, Anglicanism, Presbyterianism, the Moravian Church, the Methodist Church and the Congregational Church.
It is shorter than the full Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed adopted in 381, but it is still explicitly trinitarian in structure with sections affirming belief in God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit. 
It does not address some Christological issues defined in the Nicene Creed. It thus says nothing explicitly about the divinity of either Jesus or the Holy Spirit. For this reason, it was held to predate the Nicene Creed in medieval Latin tradition.
The expression "Apostle's Creed" is first mentioned in a letter from the Synod of Milan dated AD 390, referring to a belief that 
each of the Twelve Apostles contributed an article to the twelve articles of the creed.
This belief was explicitly challenged by the orthodox delegates at the Council of Florence (1431–1449), and was shown to be historically untenable still in the 15th century by Lorenzo Valla.
History.
The ecclesiastical use of Latin "symbolum" for "creed"—in the sense of "a distinctive mark of Christians", from the sense of Greek σύμβολον, "a sign or token used for identification"—first occurs around the middle of the 3rd century, in the correspondence of St. Cyprian and St. Firmilian, the latter in particular speaking of the trinitarian formula as the "Symbol of the Trinity", and recognizing it as an integral part of the rite of baptism.
The term "Symbolum Apostolicum" appears for the first time in a letter, probably written by Ambrose, from a Council in Milan to Pope Siricius in about AD 390 "Let them give credit to the Symbol of the Apostles, which the Roman Church has always kept and preserved undefiled". 
Ambrose's term is here referring to the Old Roman Creed, the immediate predecessor of what is now known as the "Apostle's Creed". 
The narrative of this creed having been jointly created by the Apostles, with each of the twelve contributing one of twelve articles, was already current at that time.
The Old Roman Creed had evolved from simpler texts based on Matthew 28:19, part of the Great Commission, and it has been argued that this earlier text was already in written form by the late 2nd century (c. 180).
While the individual statements of belief that are included in the Apostles' Creed – even those not found in the Old Roman Symbol – are found in various writings by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Novatian, Marcellus, Rufinus, Ambrose, Augustine, Nicetas, and Eusebius Gallus, the earliest appearance of what we know as the Apostles' Creed was in the "De singulis libris canonicis scarapsus" ("Excerpt from Individual Canonical Books") of St. Pirminius (Migne, "Patrologia Latina" 89, 1029 ff.), written between 710 and 714. Bettenson and Maunder state that it is first from "Dicta Abbatis Pirminii de singulis libris canonicis scarapsus" ("idem quod excarpsus", excerpt), c. 750.
The text of what is now known as the "Apostles' Creed" was most likely developed in southern Gaul around the midpoint of the 5th century.
A creed that is virtually identical to the current one is recorded by Faustus of Riez. It is possible that Faustus had the identical text, as the original text written by Faustus cannot be reconstructed with certainty. A version that is identical to the current one with the single exception of "infera" in place of "inferos" is recorded in the late 5th century.
However, the Old Roman Creed remained the standard liturgical text of the Roman Church throughout the 4th to 7th centuries. It was replaced by the "Gallic" version of the Apostles' Creed only in the later 8th century, under Charlemagne, who imposed it throughout his dominions.
The phrase "descendit ad inferos" ("he descended into hell") is not found in the Nicene Creed.
It echoes Ephesians 4:9, "κατέβη εἰς τὰ κατώτερα μέρη τῆς γῆς" ("he descended into the lower earthly regions"). 
It is of interest that this phrase first appeared in one of the two versions of Rufinus (d. 411), the Creed of Aquileia, and then did not appear again in any version of the creed until AD 650.
Similarly, the references to the communion of saints is found neither in the Old Roman Symbol nor in the Nicene Creed.
The reference to God as "creator of heaven and earth" likewise is not in the Nicene Creed of 325, but it is present in the extended version of the Nicene Creed (the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed) of 381.
The Eastern Orthodox Church does not use the Apostles' Creed, not because of an objection to any of its articles, but because of its omissions necessary for the definition of Nicene Christianity. The Orthodox delegates at the Council of Florence (1431–1449) explicitly challenged the western tradition attributing the Apostles' Creed to the Twelve Apostles. This tradition was also shown to be historically untenable by Lorenzo Valla.
The Roman Church does not insist on the apostolic age of the text, the Roman catechism instead explains that "The Apostles' Creed is so called because it is rightly considered to be a faithful summary of the apostles' faith."
Text.
The following gives the original Latin text, with the traditional division into twelve articles, alongside an English translation. 
Underlined passages are those not present in the Old Roman Symbol as recorded by Tyrannius Rufinus.
There is also a received Greek text, which alongside the Latin is found in the "Psalterium Græcum et Romanum", 
erroneously ascribed to Pope Gregory the Great. It was first edited by Archbishop Ussher in 1647, based on a manuscript 
preserved in the library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.
The Latin text agrees with the "Creed of Pirminius" edited by Charles Abel Heurtley ("De Fide Symbolo", 1900, p. 71).
Four other Greek translations with slight variations were discovered by Carl Paul Caspari, and published 
in 1879 ("Alte und neue Quellen zur Geschichte des Taufsymbols", vol. 3, pp. 11 sqq.).
&lt;!--This is the Greek text given by Shaff, apparently based on the one edited by Ussher. 

