
The Hebrew term "Abaddon" ( "Avaddon", meaning "doom"), and its Greek equivalent "Apollyon" (, "Apollýōn") appear in the Bible as both a place of destruction and an archangel of the abyss. In the Hebrew Bible, "abaddon" is used with reference to a bottomless pit, often appearing alongside the place ("Sheol"), meaning the realm of the dead.
In the Book of Revelation of the New Testament, an angel called Abaddon is described as the king of an army of locusts; his name is first transcribed in Greek (Revelation 9:11—"whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon," a name that means "destruction") as , and then translated (which in Greek means "the Destroyer", , "Apollyon"). The Vulgate and the Douay–Rheims Bible have additional notes not present in the Greek text, "in Latin "Exterminans"", "exterminans" being the Latin word for "destroyer".
Etymology.
According to the Brown–Driver–Briggs lexicon, the Hebrew "’ăḇaddōn" is an intensive form of the Semitic root and verb stem "’ăḇāḏ" "perish", transitive "destroy", which occurs 184 times in the Hebrew Bible. The Septuagint, an early Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible, renders "Abaddon" as "ἀπώλεια", while the Greek "Apollýon" is the active participle of ἀπόλλυμι "apóllymi", "to destroy".
Judaism.
Hebrew Bible.
The term "abaddon" appears six times in the Masoretic text of the Hebrew Bible; "abaddon" means destruction or "place of destruction", or the realm of the dead, and is accompanied by Sheol. 
Second Temple era texts.
The text of the Thanksgiving Hymns—which was found in the Dead Sea Scrolls—tells of "the Sheol of Abaddon" and of the "torrents of Belial [that] burst into Abaddon". The "Biblical Antiquities" (misattributed to Philo) mentions Abaddon as a place (destruction) rather than an individual. Abaddon is also one of the compartments of Gehenna. By extension, it can mean an underworld abode of lost souls, or Gehenna.
Rabbinical literature.
In some legends, Abaddon is identified as a realm where the damned lie in fire and snow, one of the places in Gehenna that Moses visited.
Christianity.
New Testament.
The New Testament contain the first known depiction of "Abaddon" as an individual entity instead of a place.
In Revelation 9:11, Abaddon is described as "Destroyer", the angel of the Abyss, and as the king of a plague of locusts resembling horses with crowned human faces, women's hair, lions' teeth, wings, iron breast-plates, and a tail with a scorpion's stinger that torments for five months anyone who does not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
The symbolism of Revelation 9:11 leaves the identity of Abaddon open to interpretation. Protestant commentator Matthew Henry (1708) believed Abaddon to be the Antichrist, whereas the Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary (1871) and Henry Hampton Halley (1922) identified the angel as Satan.
In contrast, the Methodist publication "The Interpreter's Bible" states, "Abaddon, however, is an angel not of Satan but of God, performing his work of destruction at God's bidding", citing the context at Revelation chapter 20, verses 1 through 3. Jehovah's Witnesses also cite Revelation 20:1-3 where the angel having "the key of the abyss" is actually shown to be a representative of God, concluding that "Abaddon" is another name for Jesus after his resurrection.
Apocryphal texts.
In the gnostic 3rd century Acts of Thomas, Abaddon is the name of a demon, or the devil himself.
Abaddon is given particularly important roles in two sources, a homily entitled "The Enthronement of Abaddon" by pseudo-Timothy of Alexandria, and the Book of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, by Bartholomew the Apostle. In the homily by Timothy, Abaddon was first named "Muriel", and had been given the task by God of collecting the earth that would be used in the creation of Adam. Upon completion of this task, the angel was appointed as a guardian. Everyone, including the angels, demons, and corporeal entities feared him. Abaddon was promised that any who venerated him in life could be saved. Abaddon is also said to have a prominent role in the Last Judgment, as the one who will take the souls to the Valley of Josaphat. He is described in the "Book of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ" as being present in the Tomb of Jesus at the moment of the resurrection of Jesus.

