
The Aimaq () or Chahar Aimaq (), also transliterated as Aimagh, Aimak and Aymaq, are a collection of Sunni and mostly Persian and Pashto-speaking nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes. They live mostly in the central and western highlands of Afghanistan, especially in Ghor, Badghis, and Herat Provinces, and to a lesser extent in the Khorasan Province of Iran. Aimaqs were originally known as "chahar" ("four") Aymaqs: the "Taymani" (the main element in the population of Ghor), the "Firozkohi" (mostly in Badghis), the "Jamshidi" and the "Timuri". Other sources state that the Aimaq Hazara are one of the "Chahar", with the Timuri instead being of the "lesser Aimaqs" or "Aimaq-e digar" ("other Aimaqs").
The Aimaq speak a number of subdialects of the Aimaq dialect of Persian language, but some southern groups of Taymani, Firozkohi, and northeastern Timuri Aimaqs have adopted the Pashto language.
Origin and culture.
The Aimaqs claim different origins based on their tribal background. Some claim to be descended from the troops of Genghis Khan. Other tribes like the Taymani (Aimaq tribe) and Firozkohi claim descent from other Pashtun tribes.
Aimaq is a Mongolic word that means "tribe" or "grazing territory". Of all Aimaqs, Aimaq Hazara and Timuri are closest to the Mongol tradition since they live in yurts, whereas other Aimaqs live in traditional Afghan black tents. The Aimaq are largely nomadic to semi-nomadic goat and sheep herders. They also trade with villages and farmers during migrations for pastures for their livestock. The material culture and foodstuffs of the Aimaq include skins, carpets, milk, dairy products and more. They trade these products to settled peoples in return for vegetables, grains, fruits, nuts, and other types of foods and goods.
Classification of tribes.
Aimaq tribes
Demographics.
Estimates of the Aimaq population vary between 250,000 and 500,000. They are largely Sunni Muslims—except for the Jamshidi who are mainly Ismaili Shia in the main—and in contrast to the Hazara, who are mostly Shia Muslims.

