
In elementary number theory, Bézout's identity (also called Bézout's lemma) is the following theorem:
Here the greatest common divisor of 0 and 0 is taken to be 0. The integers "x" and "y" are called Bézout coefficients for ("a", "b"); they are not unique. A pair of Bézout coefficients can be computed by the extended Euclidean algorithm, and this pair is one of the two pairs such that formula_1 and formula_2. An equality may occur only if one of "a" and "b" is a multiple of the other.
As an example, the greatest common divisor of 15 and 69 is 3, and can be written .
Many other theorems in elementary number theory, such as Euclid's lemma or Chinese remainder theorem, result from Bézout's identity.
A Bézout domain is an integral domain in which Bézout's identity holds. In particular, Bézout's identity holds in principal ideal domains. Every theorem that results from Bézout's identity is thus true in all these domains.
Structure of solutions.
If and are not both zero and one pair of Bézout coefficients has been computed (e.g., using extended Euclidean algorithm), all pairs can be represented in the form
where is an arbitrary integer, is the greatest common divisor of and , and the fractions simplify to integers.
If and are both nonzero, then exactly two of these pairs of pairs of Bézout coefficients satisfy 
and equality may occur only if one of and divides the other. 
This relies on a property of Euclidean division: given two non-zero integers and , if does not divide , there is exactly one pair such that and , and another one such that and .
The two pairs of small Bézout's coefficients are obtained from the given one by choosing for in the above formula either of the two integers next to formula_5.
The Extended Euclidean algorithm always produces one of these two minimal pairs.
Example.
Let and , then . Then the following Bézout's identities are had, with the Bézout coefficients written in red for the minimal pairs and in blue for the other ones.
If is the original pair of Bézout coefficients, then formula_7 yields the minimal pairs via , respectively ; that is, , and .
Proof.
Given any nonzero integers and , let formula_8 The set is nonempty since it contains either or (with and ). Since is a nonempty set of positive integers, it has a minimum element formula_9, by the Well-ordering principle. To prove that is the greatest common divisor of and , it must be proven that is a common divisor of and , and that for any other common divisor , one has .
The Euclidean division of by may be written
The remainder is in formula_11, because
Thus is of the form formula_13, and hence formula_14. However, , and is the smallest positive integer in : the remainder can therefore not be in , making necessarily 0. This implies that is a divisor of . Similarly is also a divisor of , and is a common divisor of and .
Now, let be any common divisor of and ; that is, there exist and such that
 and . One has thus
That is is a divisor of , and, therefore 
Generalizations.
For three or more integers.
Bézout's identity can be extended to more than two integers: if 
then there are integers formula_17 such that
has the following properties:
For polynomials.
Bézout's identity works for univariate polynomials over a field exactly in the same ways as for integers. In particular the Bézout's coefficients and the greatest common divisor may be computed with the extended Euclidean algorithm.
As the common roots of two polynomials are the roots of their greatest common divisor, Bézout's identity and fundamental theorem of algebra imply the following result: 
The generalization of this result to any number of polynomials and indeterminates is Hilbert's Nullstellensatz.
For principal ideal domains.
As noted in the introduction, Bézout's identity works not only in the ring of integers, but also in any other principal ideal domain (PID).
That is, if "R" is a PID, and "a" and "b" are elements of "R", and "d" is a greatest common divisor of "a" and "b",
then there are elements "x" and "y" in "R" such that "ax" + "by" = "d". The reason is that the ideal "Ra"+"Rb" is principal and equal to "Rd".
An integral domain in which Bézout's identity holds is called a Bézout domain.
History.
French mathematician Étienne Bézout (1730–1783) proved this identity for polynomials. However, this statement for integers can be found already in the work of another French mathematician, Claude Gaspard Bachet de Méziriac (1581–1638).

