
A bokken (, , "wood", and "ken", "sword") (or a "bokutō" , as they are instead called in Japan) is a Japanese wooden sword used for training in kenjutsu. It is usually the size and shape of a "katana", but is sometimes shaped like other swords, such as the "wakizashi" and "tantō". Some ornamental "bokken" are decorated with mother-of-pearl work and elaborate carvings. Sometimes it is spelled "boken" in English.
"Bokken" are traditionally composed of red oak or white oak, although any hard wood can be used. In comparison, practice swords made of flexible, soft wood such as bamboo are referred to as a "shinai".
History.
It is hard to determine precisely when the first "bokken" appeared due to secrecy in ancient martial arts training and loose record-keeping. While various mock weapons were surely used during the earlier periods of Japanese history, usage of a "bokken" in their modern form first emerged during the Muromachi Period (1336–1600) for the training of samurai warriors in the various ryūs (schools of martial arts and swordsmanship) of the era. If a malleable steel katana is repeatedly used, it can easily become nicked and the edge flawed, eventually leading to a broken expensive sword. "Bokken" are safer than fighting with real swords, and are considerably more durable; a wielder can make contact with other trainee's swords with little fear of damage.
While "bokken" are safer for sparring and practice than katanas, they are still lethal weapons in the hands of trained users. A famous legend to this effect exists involves Miyamoto Musashi, a ronin known to fight fully armed foes with only one or two "bokkens". According to the story, he agreed to a duel with Sasaki Kojiro at the early morning on Ganryūjima island, a tiny sandbar between Kyushu and Honshu. Musashi overslept the morning of the duel, however, and hastily made his way to the duel late. He carved a crude "bokken" from an oar with his knife while traveling on a boat to the duel. At the duel, Sasaki was armed with his large "nodachi", yet Musashi crushed Sasaki's skull with a single blow from his "bokken", killing him. While many elements of the story are likely apocryphal, the potential danger of a "bokken" from the legend is real.
Before the Meiji era, "bokken" were very likely manufactured by woodworkers not specialized in "bokken" manufacture. At the beginning of the 20th century "bokken" manufacture started more formally, mainly in Miyakonojo (Kyushu region). The last four remaining "bokken" workshops of Japan are still located in Miyakonojo.
The "standard "bokken"", mostly used in Kendo, Iaido, and Aikido was created by master Aramaki in collaboration with the All Japan Kendo Federation in the 1950s and was the first standardized "bokken" ever created.
Usage.
The "bokken" is used as an inexpensive and relatively safe substitute for a real sword in several martial arts such as "aikido", "kendo", "iaido", "kenjutsu", and "jodo". Its simple wooden construction demands less care and maintenance than a katana. In addition, training with a "bokken" does not carry the same mortal risk associated with that of a sharp metal sword, both for the user and other practitioners nearby. While its use has several advantages over use of a live edged weapon, it can still be deadly, and any training with a "bokken" should be done with due care. Injuries occurring from "bokken" are very similar to those caused by clubs and similar battering weapons and include compound fractures, ruptured organs, and other such blunt force injuries. In some ways, a "bokken" can be more dangerous as the injuries caused are often unseen and inexperienced practitioners may underestimate the risk of harm. It is not a sparring weapon, but is intended to be used in kata and to acclimate the student to the feel of a real sword. For sparring, a bamboo shinai is typically used instead for obvious safety reasons.
In 2003, the All Japan Kendo Federation (AJKF) introduced a set of basic exercises using a "bokuto" called "Bokuto Ni Yoru Kendo Kihon-waza Keiko-ho". This form of practice is intended primarily for kendo practitioners up to Nidan ranking, but can be beneficial for all kendo students.
"Suburito" are "bokken" designed for use in "suburi". "Suburi", literally "bare swinging," are solo cutting exercises. Suburito are thicker and heavier than normal "bokken" and users of suburito must therefore develop both strength and technique. Their weight makes them unsuitable for paired practice and solo forms. Miyamoto Musashi's "bokken" made of an oar in his legendary duel with Sasaki Kojiro was presumably a suburi-sized "bokken".
As late as 2015, "bokken" were issued to the Los Angeles Police Mounted Unit for use as batons.
Types.
"Bokken" can be made to represent any style of weapon required such as nagamaki, no-dachi, yari, naginata, kama, etc. The most widely used styles are:
Additionally, various koryu (traditional Japanese martial arts) have their own distinct styles of "bokken" which can vary slightly in length, tip shape, or in whether or not a tsuba (hilt guard) is added.
The All Japan Kendo Federation specify the dimensions of "bokken" for use in the modern kendo kata, called "Nippon kendo kata".
"Bokken" are traditionally composed of red oak or white oak, with white oak varieties being slightly more expensive and prestigious. Other common tree varieties used included ebony, biwa, and sunuke in Japan, and hickory, persimmon, ironwood, and walnut for trees native to the Americas. Biwa trees were used at least partially due to a folk superstition that wounded inflicted by biwa wood would never heal. 
In fiction.
"Bokken" has been depicted in film, manga, anime, and comic books.

