
In mathematics, specifically in real analysis, the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, named after Bernard Bolzano and Karl Weierstrass, is a fundamental result about convergence in a finite-dimensional Euclidean space R"n". The theorem states that each bounded sequence in R"n" has a convergent subsequence. An equivalent formulation is that a subset of R"n" is sequentially compact if and only if it is closed and bounded. The theorem is sometimes called the sequential compactness theorem.
History and significance.
The Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem is named after mathematicians Bernard Bolzano and Karl Weierstrass. It was actually first proved by Bolzano in 1817 as a lemma in the proof of the intermediate value theorem. Some fifty years later the result was identified as significant in its own right, and proved again by Weierstrass. It has since become an essential theorem of analysis.
Proof.
First we prove the theorem for formula_1 (set of all real numbers), in which case the ordering on formula_1 can be put to good use. Indeed, we have the following result:
Lemma: Every infinite sequence formula_3 in formula_1 has a monotone subsequence.
Proof: Let us call a positive integer-valued index formula_5 of a sequence a "peak" of the sequence when formula_6 for every formula_7. Suppose first that the sequence has infinitely many peaks, which means there is a subsequence with the following indices formula_8 and the following terms formula_9. So, the infinite sequence formula_3 in formula_1 has a monotone subsequence, which is formula_12. But suppose now that there are only finitely many peaks, let formula_13 be the final peak and let the first index of a new subsequence formula_12 be set to formula_15. Then formula_16 is not a peak, since formula_16 comes after the final peak, which implies the existence of formula_18 with formula_19 and formula_20. Again, formula_18 comes after the final peak, hence there is an formula_22 where formula_23 with formula_24. Repeating this process leads to an infinite non-decreasing subsequence  formula_25, thereby proving that every infinite sequence formula_3 in formula_1 has a monotone subsequence. 
Now suppose one has a bounded sequence in formula_1; by the lemma proven above there exists a monotone subsequence, likewise also bounded. It follows from the monotone convergence theorem that this subsequence converges.
Finally, the general case (formula_29), can be reduced to the case of formula_1 as follows: given a bounded sequence in formula_29, the sequence of first coordinates is a bounded real sequence, hence it has a convergent subsequence. One can then extract a sub-subsequence on which the second coordinates converge, and so on, until in the end we have passed from the original sequence to a subsequence formula_5 times—which is still a subsequence of the original sequence—on which each coordinate sequence converges, hence the subsequence itself is convergent.
Alternative proof.
There is also an alternative proof of the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem using nested intervals. We start with a bounded sequence formula_3:
Because we halve the length of an interval at each step, the limit of the interval's length is zero. Thus there is a number formula_34 which is in each interval formula_35. Now we show, that formula_34 is an accumulation point of formula_3.
Take a neighbourhood formula_38 of formula_34. Because the length of the intervals converges to zero, there is an interval formula_40 which is a subset of formula_38. Because formula_40 contains by construction infinitely many members of formula_3 and formula_44, also formula_38 contains infinitely many members of formula_3. This proves that formula_34 is an accumulation point of formula_3. Thus, there is a subsequence of formula_3 which converges to formula_34.
Sequential compactness in Euclidean spaces.
Suppose "A" is a subset of R"n" with the property that every sequence in "A" has a subsequence converging to an element of "A". Then "A" must be bounded, since otherwise there exists a sequence "x""m" in "A" with ||"x""m"|| ≥ "m" for all "m", and then every subsequence is unbounded and therefore not convergent. Moreover, "A" must be closed, since from a noninterior point "x" in the complement of "A", one can build an "A"-valued sequence converging to "x". Thus the subsets "A" of R"n" for which every sequence in "A" has a subsequence converging to an element of "A" – i.e., the subsets which are sequentially compact in the subspace topology – are precisely the closed and bounded subsets.
This form of the theorem makes especially clear the analogy to the Heine–Borel theorem, which asserts that a subset of R"n" is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded. In fact, general topology tells us that a metrizable space is compact if and only if it is sequentially compact, so that the Bolzano–Weierstrass and Heine–Borel theorems are essentially the same.
Application to economics.
There are different important equilibrium concepts in economics, the proofs of the existence of which often require variations of the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem. One example is the existence of a Pareto efficient allocation. An allocation is a matrix of consumption bundles for agents in an economy, and an allocation is Pareto efficient if no change can be made to it which makes no agent worse off and at least one agent better off (here rows of the allocation matrix must be rankable by a preference relation). The Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem allows one to prove that if the set of allocations is compact and non-empty, then the system has a Pareto-efficient allocation.

