
Banacek is an American detective TV series starring George Peppard that aired on the NBC network from 1972 to 1974. The series was part of the rotating "NBC Wednesday Mystery Movie" anthology. It alternated in its time slot with several other shows, but was the only one of them to last beyond its first season.
Premise.
Peppard played Thomas Banacek, a Polish-American freelance investigator based in Boston, who solved seemingly impossible thefts. He then collected from the insurance companies 10% of the insured value of the recovered property. One of Banacek's verbal signatures was the quotation of strangely worded yet curiously cogent "Polish" proverbs such as:
Part of the joke was that Ralph Manza as Banacek's chauffeur Jay Drury, would often ask "What does it mean, Boss?" Banacek also had a running agreement with his chauffeur for a 10% share of Banacek's 10% if he solved the crime. Mr. Drury was never at a loss for a potential solution that Banacek would always manage to shoot down with his very next line. Another recurring gag was for other characters to mispronounce his name, often, particularly in the case of rivals, deliberately. The name "Banaczek" (as pronounced in the show) is actually quite rare in Poland.
Murray Matheson is rare-bookstore owner and information source Felix Mulholland, who is always ready with a droll remark and exhibits a passion for chess and jigsaw puzzles. He also the series' only character to ever call Banacek by his first name.
Recurring characters included insurance company executive Cavanaugh (George Murdock (actor)), 
Banacek's sometime-lover and always-rival Carlie Kirkland (Christine Belford) and another insurance investigator/rival Fennyman/Henry DeWitt (Linden Chiles).
Banacek lived on historic Beacon Hill in Boston.
While he had a limousine and driver he also owned and sometimes drove an antique 1941 Packard convertible. Both vehicles had in them a mobile radio telephone at a time when such devices were uncommon and expensive. Banacek was intelligent, well-educated, cultured and suave. He was an unapologetic ladies man who enjoyed the company of beautiful women, but also street-smart and could engage in violent hand-to-hand fighting if the moment called for it; in one episode he mentions having learned combat judo in the marine corps (Peppard really did serve in the United States Marine Corps, rising to the rank of corporal while he was enlisted). He grew up in Scollay Square and a childhood acquaintance described him as the neighborhood jock who excelled in all sports. For recreation he jogs, plays squash, engages in weekend warrior touch football and sculling in the Charles River.
Production.
In general, the series was shot on the Universal Studios backlot, though location scenes were filmed around Los Angeles in areas that could pass for Boston, or rural areas near there. The episode titled "If Max Is So Smart, Why Doesn't He Tell Us Where He Is?" was shot on location at the California Institute of the Arts around the time the school first opened. "Ten Thousand Dollars a Page" was filmed at the Pasadena Art Museum, later known as the Pasadena Museum of Modern Art and now the Norton Simon Museum of Art.
A customized 1969 American Motors AMX was built by George Barris for the second regular-season episode. The car became known as the AMX-400 and it is now owned by an automobile collector. Other continuing cars in the series were a 1941 Packard 180 with a Victoria body designed by Howard "Dutch" Darrin (license plate number 178344), a 1973 Corvette (driven by Ms. Kirkland) and a 1973 Cadillac Fleetwood limousine (mobile telephone number KL 17811). In keeping with both the exotic car theme and the humor between Banacek and his driver Jay Drury, he was even chauffeured around in a Willys MB, Jeep CJ2A, and a CJ6, as well as a brand new Ford/De Tomaso Pantera.
In preparation for both the pilot, first, and then the second seasons, the cast went to Boston and filmed a variety of background scenes. These scenes were then used through the series and are especially shown in the opening scenes, including Banacek rowing on the Charles River and walking through Government Center. In the pilot, Banacek's car pulls into his Beacon Hill home, the historic Second Harrison Gray Otis House located at 85 Mount Vernon Street. In other episodes, views are shown of the Public Garden, the entry to Felix's bookstore at 50 Beacon Street, and the Esplanade. The Boston-filmed pieces were done by a second unit and directed by Peppard himself.
Reception.
Although the show had a mixture of humor and rather intricate plots, it never generated strong ratings. Despite this, the show was well received by critics. In addition, the Polish American Congress gave the series an award for portraying Polish Americans in a good manner.
Cancellation.
"Banacek" was well received by television critics, and as a result was picked up for a third season. However, before the third season could start, Peppard quit the show to prevent his ex-wife Elizabeth Ashley from receiving a larger percentage of his earnings as part of their divorce settlement. The complication ended any chance of reviving "Banacek" during Peppard's lifetime. A&amp;E continued rebroadcasts of "Banacek" in syndication.
In popular culture.
The mentalist Steven Shaw adopted his stage name "Banachek" after the television program.
In 2018, "Banacek" was the subject of an episode-length parody in "The Simpsons" ("Homer Is Where The Art Isn't"), referencing items from the series' storytelling format to its establishing shots, including Goldenberg's theme music.
The show was referenced by the band Fun Lovin' Criminals in the lyrics of its 1998 single "Love Unlimited".
Home media.
Arts Alliance America has released the entire series on DVD in Region 1. Season one was released on May 15, 2007, without the series pilot. Season two was released on January 22, 2008, and included the pilot episode. On September 30, 2008, Arts Alliance released "Banacek: The Complete Series", a five-disc boxset featuring all 16 episodes.
In Region 2, Fabulous Films released both seasons on DVD in the UK on February 10, 2014.
In Region 4, Madman Entertainment has released both seasons on DVD in Australia.

