
The Beer–Lambert law, also known as Beer's law, the Lambert–Beer law, or the Beer–Lambert–Bouguer law relates the attenuation of light to the properties of the material through which the light is travelling. The law is commonly applied to chemical analysis measurements and used in understanding attenuation in physical optics, for photons, neutrons, or rarefied gases. In mathematical physics, this law arises as a solution of the BGK equation.
History.
The law was discovered by Pierre Bouguer before 1729, while looking at red wine, during a brief vacation in Alentejo, Portugal. It is often attributed to Johann Heinrich Lambert, who cited Bouguer's "Essai d'optique sur la gradation de la lumière" (Claude Jombert, Paris, 1729)—and even quoted from it—in his "Photometria" in 1760. Lambert's law stated that the loss of light intensity when it propagates in a medium is directly proportional to intensity and path length. Much later, August Beer discovered another attenuation relation in 1852. Beer's law stated that the transmittance of a solution remains constant if the product of concentration and path length stays constant. The modern derivation of the Beer–Lambert law combines the two laws and correlates the absorbance, which is the negative decadic logarithm of the transmittance, to both the concentrations of the attenuating species and the thickness of the material sample.
Mathematical formulation.
A common and practical expression of the Beer–Lambert law relates the optical attenuation of a physical material containing a single attenuating species of uniform concentration to the optical path length through the sample and absorptivity of the species. This expression is:
Where
A more general form of the Beer–Lambert law states that, for formula_6 attenuating species in the material sample,
or equivalently that
where
In the above equations, the transmittance formula_19 of material sample is related to its optical depth formula_20 and to its absorbance "A" by the following definition
where
Attenuation cross section and molar attenuation coefficient are related by
and number density and amount concentration by
where formula_26 is the Avogadro constant.
In case of "uniform" attenuation, these relations become
or equivalently
Cases of "non-uniform" attenuation occur in atmospheric science applications and radiation shielding theory for instance.
The law tends to break down at very high concentrations, especially if the material is highly scattering. Absorbance within range of 0.2 to 0.5 is ideal to maintain linearity in the Beer–Lambart law. If the radiation is especially intense, nonlinear optical processes can also cause variances. The main reason, however, is that the concentration dependence is in general non-linear and Beer's law is valid only under certain conditions as shown by derivation below. For strong oscillators and at high concentrations the deviations are stronger. If the molecules are closer to each other interactions can set in. These interactions can be roughly divided into physical and chemical interactions. Physical interaction do not alter the polarizability of the molecules as long as the interaction is not so strong that light and molecular quantum state intermix (strong coupling), but cause the attenuation cross sections to be non-additive via electromagnetic coupling. Chemical interactions in contrast change the polarizability and thus absorption. 
Expression with attenuation coefficient.
The Beer–Lambert law can be expressed in terms of attenuation coefficient, but in this case is better called Lambert's law since amount concentration, from Beer's law, is hidden inside the attenuation coefficient. The (Napierian) attenuation coefficient formula_30 and the decadic attenuation coefficient formula_31 of a material sample are related to its number densities and amount concentrations as
respectively, by definition of attenuation cross section and molar attenuation coefficient. Then the Beer–Lambert law becomes
and
In case of "uniform" attenuation, these relations become
or equivalently
In many cases, the attenuation coefficient does not vary with formula_40, in which case one does not have to perform an integral and can express the law as:
where the attenuation is usually an addition of absorption coefficient formula_42 (creation of electron-hole pairs) or scattering (for example Rayleigh scattering if the scattering centers are much smaller than the incident wavelength). Also note that for some systems we can put formula_43 (1 over inelastic mean free path) in place of formula_30.
Derivation.
Assume that a beam of light enters a material sample. Define "z" as an axis parallel to the direction of the beam. Divide the material sample into thin slices, perpendicular to the beam of light, with thickness d"z" sufficiently small that one particle in a slice cannot obscure another particle in the same slice when viewed along the "z" direction. The radiant flux of the light that emerges from a slice is reduced, compared to that of the light that entered, by , where "μ" is the (Napierian) attenuation coefficient, which yields the following first-order linear ODE:
The attenuation is caused by the photons that did not make it to the other side of the slice because of scattering or absorption. The solution to this differential equation is obtained by multiplying the integrating factor
throughout to obtain
which simplifies due to the product rule (applied backwards) to
Integrating both sides and solving for Φe for a material of real thickness "ℓ", with the incident radiant flux upon the slice and the transmitted radiant flux gives
and finally
Since the decadic attenuation coefficient "μ"10 is related to the (Napierian) attenuation coefficient by , one also have
To describe the attenuation coefficient in a way independent of the number densities "n""i" of the "N" attenuating species of the material sample, one introduces the attenuation cross section . "σ""i" has the dimension of an area; it expresses the likelihood of interaction between the particles of the beam and the particles of the specie "i" in the material sample:
One can also use the molar attenuation coefficients , where NA is the Avogadro constant, to describe the attenuation coefficient in a way independent of the amount concentrations of the attenuating species of the material sample:
The above assumption that the attenuation cross sections are additive is generally incorrect since electromagnetic coupling occurs if the distances between the absorbing entities is small. 
The derivation of the concentration dependence of the absorbance is based on electromagnetic theory. Accordingly, the macroscopic polarization of a medium formula_54 derives from the microscopic dipole moments formula_55 in the absence of interaction according to
where formula_57 is the dipole moment and formula_58 the number of absorbing entities per unit volume. On the other hand, macroscopic polarization is given by:
Here formula_60represents the relative dielectric function, formula_61 the vacuum permittivity and formula_62 the electric field. After equating and solving for the relative dielectric function the result is:
If we take into account that the polarizability formula_64 is defined by formula_65 and that for the number of absorbers per unit volume formula_66holds, it follows that:
According to Maxwell's wave equation the following relation between the complex dielectric function and the complex index of refraction function holds formula_68for isotropic and homogeneous media. Therefore:
The imaginary part of the complex index of refraction is the index of absorption formula_70. Employing the imaginary part of the polarizability formula_71and the approximation formula_72 it follows that:
Taking into account the relation between formula_70 and formula_75, formula_76 it eventually follows that
As a consequence, the linear relation between concentration and absorbance is generally an approximation, and holds in particular only for small polarisabilities and weak absorptions, i.e. oscillator strengths. If we do not introduce the approximation formula_72, and employ instead the following relation between the imaginary part of the relative dielectric function and index of refraction and absorption formula_79 it can be seen that the molar attenuation coefficient depends on the index of refraction (which is itself concentration dependent):
Validity.
Under certain conditions the Beer–Lambert law fails to maintain a linear relationship between attenuation and concentration of analyte. These deviations are classified into three categories:
There are at least six conditions that need to be fulfilled in order for the Beer–Lambert law to be valid. These are:
If any of these conditions are not fulfilled, there will be deviations from the Beer–Lambert law.
The Beer–Lambert law is not compatible with Maxwell's equations. Being strict, the law does not describe the transmittance through a medium, but the propagation within that medium. It can be made compatible with Maxwell's equations if the transmittance of a sample with solute is ratioed against the transmittance of the pure solvent which explains why it works so well in spectrophotometry. As this is not possible for pure media, the uncritical employment of the Beer–Lambert law can easily generate errors of the order of 100% or more. In such cases it is necessary to apply the Transfer-matrix method. A detailed discussion of the incompatibility between the Beer–Lambert law and Maxwell's equations can be found in the review The Bouguer‐Beer‐Lambert law: Shining light on the obscure.
Recently it has also been demonstrated that Beer's law is a limiting law, since the absorbance is only approximately linearly depending on concentration. The reason is that the attenuation coefficient also depends on concentration and density, even in the absence of any interactions. These changes are, however, usually negligible except for high concentrations and large oscillator strength. For high concentrations and/or oscillator strengths, it is the integrated absorbance which is linearly depending on concentration, at least as long as there are no local field effects. If there are local field effects, they can be approximately taken into account by applying the Lorentz-Lorenz relation. In fact, Beer's law, i.e. the concentration dependence of absorbance, can be derived directly from the Lorentz-Lorenz relation (or, equivalently, the Clausius-Mossotti relation). Correspondingly, it can be demonstrated that there is a twin law according to which the change of the refractive index is approximately linear to the molar concentration for diluted solutions. This twin law can also be derived from the Lorentz-Lorenz relation.
Chemical analysis by spectrophotometry.
The Beer–Lambert law can be applied to the analysis of a mixture by spectrophotometry, without the need for extensive pre-processing of the sample. An example is the determination of bilirubin in blood plasma samples. The spectrum of pure bilirubin is known, so the molar attenuation coefficient "ε" is known. Measurements of decadic attenuation coefficient "μ"10 are made at one wavelength "λ" that is nearly unique for bilirubin and at a second wavelength in order to correct for possible interferences. The amount concentration "c" is then given by
For a more complicated example, consider a mixture in solution containing two species at amount concentrations "c"1 and "c"2. The decadic attenuation coefficient at any wavelength "λ" is, given by
Therefore, measurements at two wavelengths yields two equations in two unknowns and will suffice to determine the amount concentrations "c"1 and "c"2 as long as the molar attenuation coefficient of the two components, "ε"1 and "ε"2 are known at both wavelengths. This two system equation can be solved using Cramer's rule. In practice it is better to use linear least squares to determine the two amount concentrations from measurements made at more than two wavelengths. Mixtures containing more than two components can be analyzed in the same way, using a minimum of "N" wavelengths for a mixture containing "N" components.
The law is used widely in infra-red spectroscopy and near-infrared spectroscopy for analysis of polymer degradation and oxidation (also in biological tissue) as well as to measure the concentration of various compounds in different food samples. The carbonyl group attenuation at about 6 micrometres can be detected quite easily, and degree of oxidation of the polymer calculated.
Application for the atmosphere.
This law is also applied to describe the attenuation of solar or stellar radiation as it travels through the atmosphere. In this case, there is scattering of radiation as well as absorption. The optical depth for a slant path is , where "τ" refers to a vertical path, "m" is called the relative airmass, and for a plane-parallel atmosphere it is determined as where "θ" is the zenith angle corresponding to the given path. The Beer–Lambert law for the atmosphere is usually written
where each "τ""x" is the optical depth whose subscript identifies the source of the absorption or scattering it describes:
"m" is the "optical mass" or "airmass factor", a term approximately equal (for small and moderate values of "θ") to 1/cos "θ", where "θ" is the observed object's zenith angle (the angle measured from the direction perpendicular to the Earth's surface at the observation site). This equation can be used to retrieve "τ"a, the aerosol optical thickness, which is necessary for the correction of satellite images and also important in accounting for the role of aerosols in climate.

