
Chauvinism is the irrational belief in the superiority or dominance of one's own group or people, who are seen as strong and virtuous, while others are considered weak, unworthy or inferior. It can be described as a form of extreme patriotism and nationalism, a fervent faith in national excellence and glory.
According to legend, French soldier Nicolas Chauvin was badly wounded in the Napoleonic Wars and received a meager pension for his injuries. After Napoleon abdicated, Chauvin maintained his fanatical Bonapartist belief in the messianic mission of Imperial France, despite the unpopularity of this view under the Bourbon Restoration. His single-minded blind devotion to his cause, despite neglect by his faction and harassment by its enemies, started the use of the term.
"Chauvinism" has extended from its original use to include fanatical devotion and undue partiality to any group or cause to which one belongs, especially when such partisanship includes prejudice against or hostility toward outsiders or rival groups and persists even in the face of overwhelming opposition. This French quality finds its parallel in the English-language term "jingoism", which has retained the meaning of "chauvinism" strictly in its original sense; that is, an attitude of belligerent nationalism.
In English, the word has come to be used in some quarters as shorthand for male chauvinism, a trend reflected in "Merriam-Webster's Dictionary", which, as of 2018, begins its first example of use of the term "chauvinism" with "an attitude of superiority toward members of the opposite sex".
As nationalism.
In 1945, political theorist Hannah Arendt described the concept thus:
Male chauvinism.
Male chauvinism is the belief that men are superior to women. The first documented use of the phrase "male chauvinism" is in the 1935 Clifford Odets play "Till the Day I Die".
In the workplace.
The balance of the workforce changed during World War II. As men left their positions to enlist in the military and fight in the war, women started replacing them. After the war ended, men returned home to find jobs in the workplace now occupied by women, which "threatened the self-esteem many men derive from their dominance over women in the family, the economy, and society at large." Consequently, male chauvinism was on the rise, according to Cynthia B. Lloyd.
Lloyd and Michael Korda have argued that as they integrated back into the workforce, men returned to predominate, holding positions of power while women worked as their secretaries, usually typing dictations and answering telephone calls. This division of labor was understood and expected, and women typically felt unable to challenge their position or male superiors, argue Korda and Lloyd.
Causes.
Chauvinist assumptions are seen by some as a bias in the TAT psychological personality test. Through cross-examinations, the TAT exhibits a tendency toward chauvinistic stimuli for its questions and has the "potential for unfavorable clinical evaluation" for women.
An often cited study done in 1976 by Sherwyn Woods, Some Dynamics of Male Chauvinism, attempts to find the underlying causes of male chauvinism.
Adam Jukes argues that a reason for male chauvinism is masculinity itself:For the vast majority of people all over the world, the mother is a primary carer...There’s an asymmetry in the development of boys and girls. Infant boys have to learn how to be masculine. Girls don’t. Masculinity is not in a state of crisis. Masculinity is a crisis. I don’t believe misogyny is innate, but I believe it’s inescapable because of the development of masculinity.
Female chauvinism.
Female chauvinism is the belief that women are morally superior to men, and is considered anti-feminist.
The term has been adopted by critics of some types or aspects of feminism; second-wave feminist Betty Friedan is a notable example. Ariel Levy used the term in similar, but opposite sense in her book, "Female Chauvinist Pigs", in which she argues that many young women in the United States and beyond are replicating male chauvinism and older misogynist stereotypes.
Karen Salmansohn described what female chauvinists believe in Psychology Today when she wrote, "female chauvinists believe that men can't be emotionally evolved enough to want to grow, communicate from the heart, empathize and validate [their] female partners," and then labeling this description of men the same as calling men "emotional bimbos."

