
The Demographics of Guam details an array of demographic statistics relating to the territory of Guam. This includes statistics on population, including the Indigenous population; religious affiliations; language; and immigration. Furthermore, The Demographics of Guam provides an overview of the history of Guam, as well as a depiction of the villages in the United States territory and its populace. The population of Guam, as of April 2021 is 169, 964, based on data procured from the CIA World Factbook . While there are no large cities in Guam, however the populace resides in villages. The most populated village in Guam is Dededo, with a population of 44, 943 in 2010. The Indigenous people of Guam are known as the Chamorro people, and are the largest ethnic group in Guam, however this group is categorised as a minority in the United States territory . The mean age in the territory of Guam is 31.4 years (The World Factbook, 2021). Guam is in the Mariana Islands, and is the largest and most populated of the territories in this location.
The population density of Guam is 809 people per square metre, with a total land area of 540km squared. The urbanisation of Guam is vast, as the populace is saturated in urban areas, with 94.9% of the population of Guam residing in urban regions. 
The demographics of Guam include the demographic features of the population of Guam, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.
According to the 2010 U.S. Census, Guam had a population of 159,358, representing an increase of 2.9 percent from the population of 154,805 reported in the 2000 Census.
CIA World Factbook demographic statistics.
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook.
Religion.
According to the Pew Research Center, 2010:
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints reported 2,550 members in 5 congregations as of December 31, 2019. On May 4, 2019, The church broke ground for a temple in Yigo. 
History.
Guam is known to be the first inhabited island in the Pacific Island, discovered by the Spaniards in 1521. After Guam was discovered by Ferdinand Magellan under the flag of Spain, the island was repeatedly invaded by alien military forces. The island was officially claimed by Spain in 1565, thus it was the first island as well as the Mariana Islands, inhabited by humans in Remote Oceania. Guam has since been occupied by outside entities for over 330 years. Magellan arrived on the shores of Guam with three ships, the Trinidad, the Conception and the Victoria.The population of Guam in the mid 16th century was severely reduced, due to the bloodshed caused by the Spaniards, as well as the many diseases carried by the Europeans. Guam was ceded to the United States after the Spanish-American war in 1898. It was then taken by the Japanese in 1941 during World War II. It was retaken by the United States in 1944. 
While Guam merely covers 520km squared of land area, the United States territory is considered to be of international significance, due to geopolitics, as well as the strategic importance of Guam’s straits, islands and canals. Guam is additionally the largest landfall, for use of communications, military bases and shipping. Guam was utilised as a military base in World War II against the Japanese. 
Guam is a multi-ethnic island, as settlers from the Philippines, Korea, Japan and China form part of its populace. Guam was first settled by migrants from the Philippines in 1500 to 1400 BCE.
The Chamorro people.
The Mariana Islands is an ethnic and cultural heritage of the Chamorro people.  Despite the invasion attempts from leading military countries, such as Spain, The United States of America and Japan, the Chamorro people have maintained their traditions. The cultural endurance of the Chamorro people was evident, as the Indigenous peoples of the Mariana Islands maintained their language, tradition and integrity, in spite of the dominance of imperialism. While Guam has remained a colony in the postmodern world, the Chamorro people of Guam have gained an amount of local political control of the island traditions.
Architecture.
The most prominent historical architectural complex in Guam is latte architecture. This style of architecture is described as village complexes with both residential and communal functions. This structure is unique, as the width is constant in all sizes of latte architecture, however the height of the complex differs from small, medium and large. Latte architecture is unique to Guam and the Mariana Islands. These types of villages were utilised as expressions of a collective identity, rather than modes of competition or rank. Furthermore, the latte structures were tropes for social organisation as well as a Micronesian egalitarian and matrilineal clan. This system incorporated hierarchical authority that was founded on respect and reciprocity, rather than totalitarian power or unequal distributions of wealth.

