
In mathematics, a directed set (or a directed preorder or a filtered set) is a nonempty set formula_1 together with a reflexive and transitive binary relation formula_2 (that is, a preorder), with the additional property that every pair of elements has an upper bound. In other words, for any formula_3 and formula_4 in formula_1 there must exist formula_6 in formula_1 with formula_8 and formula_9 A directed set's preorder is called a .
The notion defined above is sometimes called an upward directed set. A downward directed set is defined analogously, meaning that every pair of elements is bounded below. 
Some authors (and this article) assume that a directed set is directed upward, unless otherwise stated. Be aware that other authors call a set directed if and only if it is directed both upward and downward.
Directed sets are a generalization of nonempty totally ordered sets. That is, all totally ordered sets are directed sets (contrast ordered sets, which need not be directed). Join semilattices (which are partially ordered sets) are directed sets as well, but not conversely. Likewise, lattices are directed sets both upward and downward.
In topology, directed sets are used to define nets, which generalize sequences and unite the various notions of limit used in analysis. Directed sets also give rise to direct limits in abstract algebra and (more generally) category theory.
Equivalent definition.
In addition to the definition above, there is an equivalent definition. A directed set is a set formula_1 with a preorder such that every finite subset of formula_1 has an upper bound. In this definition, the existence of an upper bound of the empty subset implies that formula_1 is nonempty.
Examples.
Examples of directed sets include:
Contrast with semilattices.
Directed sets are a more general concept than (join) semilattices: every join semilattice is a directed set, as the join or least upper bound of two elements is the desired formula_13 The converse does not hold however, witness the directed set {1000,0001,1101,1011,1111} ordered bitwise (e.g. formula_14 holds, but formula_15 does not, since in the last bit 1 &gt; 0), where {1000,0001} has three upper bounds but no upper bound, cf. picture. (Also note that without 1111, the set is not directed.)
Directed subsets.
The order relation in a directed set is not required to be antisymmetric, and therefore directed sets are not always partial orders. However, the term is also used frequently in the context of posets. In this setting, a subset formula_1 of a partially ordered set formula_17 is called a directed subset if it is a directed set according to the same partial order: in other words, it is not the empty set, and every pair of elements has an upper bound. Here the order relation on the elements of formula_1 is inherited from formula_19; for this reason, reflexivity and transitivity need not be required explicitly.
A directed subset of a poset is not required to be downward closed; a subset of a poset is directed if and only if its downward closure is an ideal. While the definition of a directed set is for an "upward-directed" set (every pair of elements has an upper bound), it is also possible to define a downward-directed set in which every pair of elements has a common lower bound. A subset of a poset is downward-directed if and only if its upper closure is a filter.
Directed subsets are used in domain theory, which studies directed-complete partial orders. These are posets in which every upward-directed set is required to have a least upper bound. In this context, directed subsets again provide a generalization of convergent sequences.

