
The population of Indonesia was 270.20 million according to the 2020 national census, an increase from 237.64 million according to the previous census in 2010. Fifty-six per cent live on the island of Java, the world's most populous island.
Despite a fairly effective family planning program that has been in place since 1967, Indonesia's average population growth per year was over 1.25% for the decade ending in 2020, nearly having 13% population growth for that decade. At this rate, Indonesia's population is projected to surpass the population of the United States. Some say family planning should be revitalised based on the 1967 program to avoid Indonesia becoming the world's third most populous country, but this aim has been criticised by religious groups who believe that family planning goes against religious teachings.
Indonesia has a relatively young population compared to Western nations, though it is ageing as the country's birth rate has slowed and its life expectancy has increased. The median age was 30.2 years in 2017.
Indonesia includes numerous ethnic, cultural and linguistic groups, some of which are related to each other. Since independence, Indonesian (a form of Malay and the official national language) is the language of most written communication, education, government, and business. Many local ethnic languages are the first language of most Indonesians and are still important.
Population.
Population by province.
Source: Population Census 2010, except for final column, taken from Inter-Census Survey 2015.
Note: (a) North Kalimantan province was created in 2012 (by separation from East Kalimantan province); the 2010 total figures given are those for the provinces as they were following that splitting (Urban % and Total Fertility Rate columns unadjusted).
Vital statistics.
Registered births and deaths.
Data from Department of Statistics of Indonesia :
Fertility and Births (Demographic and Health Surveys).
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):
Fertility rate and ageing population (by province).
Total fertility rate (TFR) and population over age 60 by region as of 2010:
Life expectancy.
Source: "UN World Population Prospects"
Ethnic groups.
There are over 1,300 ethnic groups in Indonesia; 95% of those are of Native Indonesian ancestry. Javanese is the largest group with 100 million people (42%), followed by Sundanese, who number nearly 40 million (15%).
Religions.
Indonesia is the world's most populous Muslim-majority nation; 86.7% of Indonesians declared themselves Muslim in the 2018 census. 10.72% of the population adhered to Christianity (of which more than 70% were Protestant), 1.74% were Hindu, 0.77% Buddhist, and 0.07% of other faiths. Most Indonesian Hindus are Balinese and most Buddhists in modern-day Indonesia are Chinese.
Languages.
Indonesian is the official language, but there are many different languages native to Indonesia. According to Ethnologue, there are currently 737 living languages spoken in Indonesia, the most widely spoken being Javanese. In Western New Guinea, there are more than 270 indigenous languages in spoken form. Some Chinese varieties, most prominently Min Nan, are also spoken. The public use of Chinese, especially usage of Chinese characters, was dissuaded officially between 1966 and 1998.
Literacy.
"definition:" age 15 and over can read and write
"total population:" 92.81%
"male:" 95.5%
"female:" 90.4% (2011 est.)
Education is free in state schools; it is compulsory for children through to grade 12. Although about 92% of eligible children are enrolled in primary school, a much smaller percentage attends full-time. About 44% of secondary school-age children attend junior high school, and some others of this age group attend vocational schools.
CIA World Factbook demographic statistics.
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
Age structure
Median age
Birth rate
Death rate
Population growth rate
Urbanization
Sex ratio
Infant mortality rate
Life expectancy at birth
HIV/AIDS
Obesity - adult prevalence rate
Children under the age of 5 years underweight
Nationality
Religions
Languages
School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education)
Education expenditures

