
Russia, the world's largest country, had a population of 142.8 million according to the 2010 census, which rose to 146.2 million as of 2021. It is the most populous country in Europe, and the ninth-most populous country in the world; with a population density of 9 inhabitants per square kilometre (23 per square mile). The overall life expectancy in Russia at birth is 73.2 years (68.2 years for males and 78.0 years for females). Since the 1990s, Russia's death rate has exceeded its birth rate. In 2018, the total fertility rate across Russia was estimated to be 1.6 children born per woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1, and is one of the lowest fertility rates in the world. Subsequently, the nation has one of the oldest populations in the world, with an median age of 40.3 years.
Russians are the largest Slavic and European nation, and Russian is the most spoken Slavic language; as well as the most spoken native language in Europe. Russia is home to approximately 117 million ethnic Russians; and roughly 85% of the Russian population was of European descent in 2010, of which the vast majority were Slavs, with a substantial minority of Finno-Ugric, Germanic, and other peoples. The 2010 census recorded roughly 81% of the population as ethnic Russians, and rest of the 19% of the population as other minorities belonging to over 190 ethnic groups across the country. 
History.
Total fertility rate, 1840–1926.
The total fertility rate is the number of children born to each woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.
In many of the following years, Russia had the highest total fertility rate in the world. These elevated fertility rates did not lead to population growth due to the casualties of the Russian Revolution, the two world wars and political killings.
Current vital statistics.
Live births 
Deaths
Natural growth
Note: Russian data includes Crimea starting in 2014.
Demographic statistics.
Demographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2019.
Demographic statistics according to the US based CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
definition: age 15 and over can read and write (2015 est.)
Russian 80.9%, Tatar 3.9%, Ukrainian 1.4%, Bashkir 1.1%, Chuvash 1%, Chechen 1%, other 10.2%, unspecified 3.9%
note: nearly 200 national and/or ethnic groups are represented in Russia's 2010 census (2010 est.)
Russian Orthodox 15–20%, Muslim 10–15%, other Christian 2% (2006 est.) Note: estimates are of practicing worshipers; Russia has large populations of non-practicing believers and non-believers, a legacy of over seven decades of Soviet rule; Russia officially recognizes Orthodox Christianity, Islam, Judaism, and Buddhism as traditional religions.
Russian (official) 85.7%, Tatar 3.2%, Chechen 1%, other 10.1%. Note: data represent native language spoken (2010 est.)
Population is heavily concentrated in the westernmost fifth of the country extending from the Baltic Sea, south to the Caspian Sea, and eastward parallel to the Kazakh border; elsewhere, sizeable pockets are isolated and generally found in the south
8.4 people per square kilometer (2010 Russian Census)
"at birth:" 1.06 /female
"under 15 years:" 1.05 /female
"15–64 years:" 0.4 /female
"65 years and over:" 0.46 /female
"total population:" 0.86 /female (2009)
Immigration.
In 2006, in a bid to compensate for the country's demographic decline, the Russian government started simplifying immigration laws and launched a state program "for providing assistance to voluntary immigration of ethnic Russians from former Soviet republics". In August 2012, as the country saw its first demographic growth since the 1990s, President Putin declared that Russia's population could reach 146 million by 2025, "mainly as a result of immigration". New citizenship rules introduced in April 2014 allowing eligible citizens from former Soviet republics to obtain Russian citizenship, have gained strong interest among Russian-speaking residents of those countries (i.e. Russians, Germans, Belarusians and Ukrainians).
There are an estimated four million illegal immigrants from the ex-Soviet states in Russia. In 2012, the Russian Federal Security Service's Border Service stated there had been an increase in illegal migration from the Middle East and Southeast Asia (Note that these were Temporary Contract Migrants) Under legal changes made in 2012, illegal immigrants who are caught will be banned from reentering the country for 10 years.
Since the collapse of the USSR, most immigrants have come from Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Azerbaijan, Moldova, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia, Belarus, and China.
Worker migration.
Temporary migrant workers in Russia consists of about 7 million people, most of the temporary workers come from Central Asia, the Balkans and East Asia. Most of them work in the construction, cleaning and in the household industries. They primarily live in cities such as Moscow, Sochi and Blagoveshchensk. The mayor of Moscow said that Moscow cannot do without worker migrants. New laws are in place that require worker migrants to be fluent in Russian, know Russian history and laws. The Russian Opposition and most of the Russian population opposes worker migration. The problem of worker migration has become so severe it has caused a rise in Russian nationalism, and spawned groups like Movement Against Illegal Immigration.
Health.
The constitution of Russia guarantees free, universal health care for all Russian citizens, through a compulsory state health insurance program. The Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation oversees the Russian public healthcare system, and the sector employs more than two million people. Federal regions also have their own departments of health that oversee local administration. Russia has the highest number of physicians, hospitals, and health care workers in the world on a per capita basis. 
According the World Bank, Russia spent 5.32% of its GDP on healthcare in 2018. It has one of the world's most female-biased sex ratios, with 0.859 males to every female. In 2019, the overall life expectancy in Russia at birth is 73.2 years (68.2 years for males and 78.0 years for females), and it had a very low infant mortality rate (5 per 1,000 live births). Obesity is a major health issue in Russia. In 2016, 61.1% of Russian adults were overweight or obese, while 23.1% were obese. In 2017, roughly 16% of Russia's deaths were attributed to obesity, while per 100,000 Russians, 123 died due to being obese.
Ethnic groups.
Russia is a multinational state, with more than 193 ethnic groups within its borders. It had a population of 142.8 million according to the 2010 Russian Census, of which around 111 million were ethnic Russians, who consisted of 80.9% of the total population, while rest of the 19% of the population were minorities. The sizable numbers of Tatars, Ukrainians, Bashkirs, Chuvash and Chechens in the country made up around 8.4% of the total population. Rest of the 10.6% of the population were diverse Indo-European, Turkic and Finno-Ugric peoples.
Around 85% of the Russian population was of European descent in the 2010 census, with a substantial minority of Finno-Ugric, Germanic, and other groups. The 2010 census recorded roughly 81% of the population as ethnic Russians, and rest of the 19% of the population as other minorities belonging to over 190 ethnic groups across the country. According to the United Nations, Russia's immigrant population is the third-largest in the world, numbering over 11.6 million; most of which are from post-Soviet states, mainly Ukrainians.
There are 22 republics in Russia, who have their own ethnicities, cultures, and languages. In 13 of them, ethnic Russians consist a minority:
Languages.
Russia's official language is Russian. However, Russia's 193 minority ethnic groups speak over 100 languages. According to the 2002 Census, 142.6 million people speak Russian, followed by Tatar with 5.3 million, and Ukrainian with 1.8 million speakers. The constitution gives the individual republics of the country the right to establish their own state languages in addition to Russian.
Russian is the most spoken native language in Europe, the most geographically widespread language of Eurasia, as well as the most widely spoken Slavic language in the world. It belongs to the Indo-European language family, is one of the living members of the East Slavic languages, and is among the larger Balto-Slavic languages. It is the second-most used language on the Internet after English, one of two official languages aboard the International Space Station, and is one of the six official languages of the United Nations.
Religion.
Russia is a secular state by constitution, and its largest religion is Christianity. It has the world's largest Orthodox population. As of a different sociological surveys on religious adherence; between 41% to over 80% of the total population of Russia adhere to the Russian Orthodox Church. Other branches of Christianity present in Russia include Roman Catholicism (approx. 1%), Baptists, Pentecostals, Lutherans and other Protestant churches (together totalling about 0.5% of the population) and Old Believers. There is some presence of Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism and other pagan beliefs are also present to some extent in remote areas, sometimes syncretized with one of the mainstream religions.
In 2017, a survey made by the Pew Research Center showed that 73% of Russians declared themselves Christians—including 71% Orthodox, 1% Catholic, and 2% Other Christians, while 15% were unaffiliated, 10% were Muslims, and 1% were from other religions. According to various reports, the proportion of Atheists in Russia is between 16% and 48% of the population. 
Islam is the second-largest religion in Russia. It is the traditional and predominant religion amongst the peoples of the North Caucasus, and amongst some Turkic peoples scattered along the Volga-Ural region. Buddhists are home to a sizeable population in four republics of Russia: Buryatia, Tuva, Zabaykalsky Krai, and Kalmykia; the only region in Europe where Buddhism is the most practised religion. Judaism has been a minority faith in Russia, as the country is home to a historical Jewish population, which is among the largest in Europe. 
Education.
Russia has the highest college-level or higher graduates in terms of percentage of population in the world, at 54%. It has a free education system, which is guaranteed for all citizens by the constitution. Since 1990, the 11-year school education has been introduced. Education in state-owned secondary schools is free. University-level education is free, with exceptions. A substantial share of students are enrolled for full pay (many state institutions started to open commercial positions in the last years).
The oldest and largest universities in Russia are Moscow State University and Saint Petersburg State University. In the 2000s, in order to create higher education and research institutions of comparable scale in Russian regions, the government launched a program of establishing federal universities, mostly by merging existing large regional universities and research institutes and providing them with special funding. These new institutions include the Southern Federal University, Siberian Federal University, Kazan Volga Federal University, North-Eastern Federal University, and Far Eastern Federal University.
Literacy.
"definition:" age 15 and over can read and write
&lt;br&gt;"total literacy:" 99.7% (2015)
&lt;br&gt;"male:" 99.7%
&lt;br&gt;"female:" 99.6%
Russia's free, widespread and in-depth educational system, inherited with almost no changes from the Soviet Union, has produced nearly 100% literacy. 97% of children receive their compulsory 9-year basic or complete 11-year education in Russian. Other languages are also used in their respective republics, for instance Tatar, and Yakut.
About 3 million students attend Russia's 519 institutions of higher education and 48 universities. As a result of great emphasis on science and technology in education, Russian medical, mathematical, scientific, and space and aviation research is generally of a high order.
Urbanized areas.
Russia is one of the world's most urbanized countries, with roughly 75% of its total population living in urban areas. Moscow, the capital and largest city, has a population estimated at 12.4 million residents within the city limits, while over 17 million residents in the urban area, and over 20 million residents in the metropolitan area. Moscow is among the world's largest cities, being the most populous city entirely within Europe, the most populous urban area in Europe, the most populous metropolitan area in Europe, and also the largest city by land area on the European continent. Saint Petersburg, the cultural capital, is the second-largest city, with a population of roughly 5.4 million inhabitants. Other major urban areas are Yekaterinburg, Novosibirsk, Kazan, Nizhny Novgorod, and Chelyabinsk.
See also.
Census information:

