
The demographics of Togo include ethnicity, population density, age, education level, health, economic status and religious affiliation.
Language and ethnicity.
Togo's population of million people ( est.) is composed of about 21 ethnic groups, the two biggest being the Tèm in the Centre (Bafilo, Sokodé, Sotouboua (about 22% of the population); they also live in Ghana and Bénin in big numbers. Tèms have a lot ties with 2/3 of the country as they live in the center of Togo. They exercise diversely almost all occupations from farmers, motors mechanic to business people] and Ewe in the South (about 21% of the population)). 
Dagomba is the first most common language in the north, where other Gur languages such as Mossi and Gourma are also found.
The ethnic groups of the coastal region, particularly Ewe and Gen language (or Mina) (the two major African languages in the south), constitute the bulk of the civil servants, professionals, and merchants, due in part to the former colonial administrations which provided greater infrastructure development in the south. Most of the southern peoples use these two closely related languages, which are spoken in commercial sectors throughout Togo.
The Kabye live on marginal land and traditionally have emigrated south from their home area in the Kara region to seek employment. Their historical means of social advancement has been through the military and law enforcement forces, and they continue to dominate these services.
Other groups include the Akposso on the Central Plateau, the Ana people who are related to the Yoruba, and live in the center of the country, in the strip between Atakpame and Tchamba, the Bassar in the Centre-West, the Tchamba in the Centre-East and the Konkombas in the upper region of Bassar, the Lambas in the Kandé region, the Hausa, the Tamberma, the Losso and the Ouachi.
Indians have a presence in Togo. White African settlers descended from the original French and German colonials make up less than 1% of the total population along with Togo's minute Lebanese community. The remaining 99% are indigenous: most people in this category hail from one of thirty-seven different tribes.
Population.
Population distribution is very uneven due to soil and terrain variations. The population is generally concentrated in the south and along the major north-south highway connecting the coast to the Sahel. Age distribution is also uneven; nearly one-half of Togolese are less than fifteen years old.
French, the official language, is used in administration and documentation. The public primary schools combine French with Ewe or Kabye as languages of instruction, depending on the region. English is spoken in neighboring Ghana and is taught in Togolese secondary schools. As a result, many Togolese, especially in the south and along the Ghana border, speak some English.
According to the total population was in , compared to only 1 395 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 39.6%, 56.9% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 3.4% was 65 years or older
Vital statistics.
Registration of vital events is in Togo not complete. The Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.
Fertility and births.
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):
Fertility data as of 2013-2014 and 2017 (DHS Program):
Other demographic statistics.
The following demographic statistics of Togo in 2019 are from the World Population Review.
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
Demographic profile.
Togo’s population is estimated to have grown to four times its size between 1960 and 2010. With nearly 60% of its populace under the age of 25 and a high annual growth rate attributed largely to high fertility, Togo’s population is likely to continue to expand for the foreseeable future. Reducing fertility, boosting job creation, and improving education will be essential to reducing the country’s high poverty rate. In 2008, Togo eliminated primary school enrollment fees, leading to higher enrollment but increased pressure on limited classroom space, teachers, and materials. Togo has a good chance of achieving universal primary education, but educational quality, the underrepresentation of girls, and the low rate of enrollment in secondary and tertiary schools remain concerns.
Population distribution.
one of the more densely populated African nations with most of the population residing in rural communities, density is highest in the south on or near the Atlantic coast.
Ethnic groups.
African (37 tribes; largest and most important are Tém in the centre and Kabyè in the north; and Ewé, Mina in the south) 99%, European and Syrian-Lebanese less than 1%
HIV Prevalence.
Adult infection rate 2.1% (2017 est.)
People living with HIV/Aids 110,000 (2017 est.)
Death rate 4,700 (2017 est.)
Sex ratio.
"at birth:"
1.03 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;"under 15 years:"
1.01 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;"15-64 years:"
0.95 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;"65 years and over:"
0.78 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;"total population:"
0.97 male(s)/female (2000 est.)
Literacy.
"definition:" age 15 and over can read and write

