
, short for "Digital Monsters" ( "Dejitaru Monsutā"), is a Japanese media franchise encompassing virtual pet toys, anime, manga, video games, films and a trading card game. The franchise focuses on the eponymous creatures, who inhabit a "Digital World", a parallel universe that originated from Earth's various communication networks.
The franchise was created in 1997 as a series of virtual pets, akin to—and influenced in style by—the contemporary Tamagotchi or nano Giga Pet toys. The creatures were first designed to look cute and iconic even on the devices' small screens; later developments had them created with a harder-edged style influenced by American comics. The franchise gained momentum with its first anime incarnation, "Digimon Adventure", and an early video game, "Digimon World", both released in 1999. Several anime series and films based on them have been released, and the video game series has expanded into genres such as role-playing, racing, fighting, and MMORPGs.
Conception and creation.
In 1996, the Tamagotchi was released, created by Akihiro Yokoi, Aki Maita and Takeichi Hongo. The Tamagotchi was one of the inspirations for the first release of the "Digimon" franchise, a device marketed in June 1997 with the name Digimon, short for "Digital Monster". Aiming at the male audience and created by Akiyoshi Hongo (a pseudonym that refers to the creators of "Tamagotchi"), this device shows to players a virtual pet composed entirely of data and designed to play and fight. In February 1998, the "DigiMon" fighting game, compatible with Windows 95 and developed by Rapture Technologies, Inc., was announced. The one-shot manga "C'mon Digimon", designed by Tenya Yabuno, was published in the Japanese magazine V-Jump by Shueisha in 1997.
A second generation of "virtual pets" was marketed six months after the launch of the first, followed by a third in 1998. Each player starts with a baby-level digital creature that has a limited number of attacks and transformations and to make the creature stronger by training and nourishing the creature; when the player is successful in a workout, the Digimon becomes strong, when the player fails, the Digimon becomes weak. Two devices can be connected, allowing two players to battle with their respective creatures, an innovation at the time, however, the battle is only possible from the moment the creature is in the child level or bigger. Playgrounds and subways were where the majority of users of the apparatus were concentrated; The virtual pet was banned in some Asian schools by being considered by parents and teachers as very noisy and violent. The first Digimon were created by Japanese designer Kenji Watanabe, influenced by American comics, which were beginning to gain popularity in Japan, and as such began to make his characters look stronger and "cool." Other types of Digimon, which until the year 2000 totaled 279, came from extensive discussions and collaborations between the Bandai company members.
Eponymous creatures.
Digimon hatch from types of eggs which are called . In the English iterations of the franchise there is another type of Digi-Egg that can be used to digivolve, or transform, Digimon. This second type of Digi-Egg is called a in Japanese. They evolve via a process called "Digivolution" which changes their appearance and increases their powers. The effect of Digivolution, however, is not permanent in the partner Digimon of the main characters in the anime, and Digimon who have digivolved will most of the time revert to their previous form after a battle or if they are too weak to continue. Some Digimon act feral. Most, however, are capable of intelligence and human speech. They are able to digivolve by the use of Digivices that their human partners have. There are currently over 1400 Digimon.
Anime.
Television series.
The "Digimon" anime series was produced by Toei Animation and Bandai of Japan. Beginning in 1999, an anime series was green-lit as the first of the "Digimon" films aired in theaters. Originally, "Digimon Adventure" was supposed to be a short film, but after the storyboard was finished, a request for the film to become a children's television series was made. Several anime series have since been produced, with the first six series localized into English for release in Western markets.
Films.
Several "Digimon" featurette films were released in Japan, with some of them seasonal tie-ins for their respective television series.
Distribution and localization.
In the United States, "Digimon Adventure" premiered in August 1999 on the Fox Broadcasting Company. An English-language adaptation of the series produced by Saban Entertainment (later Sensation Animation), the series was broadcast on Fox Kids. Saban would dub the first four anime series in the franchise, which were collectively retitled "Digimon: Digital Monsters". Some scenes from the original version were modified or omitted in order to comply with Fox's standards and practices. The show also featured more jokes and added dialogue, along with a completely different musical score. As a cross-promotional stunt, 2001 and 2002 saw "Digi-Bowl" specials co-produced with Fox Sports; "NFL on Fox" commentator Terry Bradshaw provided interstitial segments in-between episodes as if the episodes were actually a football game.
The Walt Disney Company would acquire Saban during the third series, "Digimon Tamers". Reruns of the first three series began airing on the cable network ABC Family, while the fourth series, "Digimon Frontier", premiered on UPN as part of a deal between Disney and UPN. UPN aired the series until late August 2003, when they severed their ties to Disney. "Frontier" aired on ABC Family concurrently, and also aired in reruns on Toon Disney under the Jetix branding.
An English version of "Digimon Data Squad", produced by Studiopolis, would premiere October 1, 2007, on Toon Disney. In September 2012, Saban Brands, a successor to Saban Entertainment, announced it had acquired the "Digimon" anime franchise. Saban would announce that they would be producing an English dub for "Digimon Xros Wars", retitled "Digimon Fusion", for broadcast on Nickelodeon in the United States starting September 7, 2013. After three episodes, the show was moved to Nicktoons starting October 13, 2013.
Previously, Funimation Entertainment had online streaming rights to subtitled versions of "Digimon Adventure 02" and "Digimon Tamers". "Digimon Adventure", "Adventure 02", and "Tamers", would later begin streaming on Netflix in 2013 and 2014 with Japanese audio and English subtitles. Crunchyroll began streaming the English-subtitled version of "Digimon Fusion" outside Japan in November 2011. The English-localized version of its first season became available on Netflix starting September 13, 2014, with the second season arriving on March 8, 2016. After Crunchyroll acquired streaming rights to the dubbed versions and Funimation acquired rights to the subtitled versions, the dubbed versions of "Adventure", "Adventure 02", and "Tamers" were briefly removed from Netflix.
After Saban Capital Group sold most of the properties of Saban Brands to Hasbro in 2018, the rights of "Digimon" in the United States are currently owned by Shout! Factory.
International.
In Canada, the English versions of "Digimon" were broadcast on YTV, with the exception of "Data Squad", which aired in Family Channel's Jetix block. YTV would eventually acquire "Digimon Fusion", but only the first 26 episodes were shown.
In the United Kingdom, "Digimon" first aired on Fox Kids. ITV's children's slot CITV would broadcast "Adventure", "Adventure 02" and several episodes of "Tamers" during after school hours from 2001–2002. The rest of "Tamers" aired on Fox Kids from 2002–04. "Digimon Frontier" was originally announced to be broadcast on Jetix, but the series was later dropped. The series eventually saw a release on October 29, 2018. From 2011, "Digimon Data Squad" airs on Kix!. 
According to Fox Kids' (2000–03) and Kix's (2010–) BARB Television ratings, "Adventure", "Adventure 02" &amp; "Tamers" have been the most popular series'/seasons in the United Kingdom and was consistently in the weekly top 10 broadcasts for both channels for new episodes. Broadcast rights and merchandising sub-licensing rights for "Digimon Fusion" in the UK have been acquired by ITV Studios Global Entertainment. "Digimon Fusion" has aired since Spring 2014 on digital terrestrial channel, CITV.
Manga.
"Digimon" first appeared in narrative form in the one-shot manga "C'mon Digimon", released in the summer of 1997. "C'mon Digimon" spawned the popular "Digimon Adventure V-Tamer 01" manga, written by Hiroshi Izawa, which began serialization on November 21, 1998.
Yuen Wong Yu manhua.
A Chinese manhua was written and drawn by Yuen Wong Yu (余 遠鍠 "Yu Yuen-wong"), who based its storyline on the television series. This adaptation covers "Digimon Adventure" in five volumes, "Digimon Adventure 02" in two, "Digimon Tamers" in four, and "Digimon Frontier" in three. The original stories are heavily abridged, though on rare occasions events play out differently from the anime. The Chinese-language version was published by Rightman Publishing Ltd. in Hong Kong. Yu also wrote "D-Cyber".
Two English versions were also released. The first one was published by Chuang Yi in Singapore. The second one, which was adapted by Lianne Sentar, was released by TOKYOPOP in North America.&lt;br&gt;The three volumes for "Digimon Frontier" have been released by Chuang Yi in English. These have not been released by TOKYOPOP in North America or Europe. However, the Chuang Yi releases of "Digimon Frontier" were distributed by Madman Entertainment in Australia.
Dark Horse.
Dark Horse Comics published American-style Digimon comic books, adapting the first thirteen episodes of the English dub of "Digimon Adventure" in 2001. The story was written by Daniel Horn and Ryan Hill, and illustrated by Daniel Horn and Cara L. Niece.
Panini.
The Italian publishing company, Panini, approached Digimon in different ways in different countries. While Germany created their own adaptations of episodes, the United Kingdom (UK) reprinted the Dark Horse titles, then translated some of the German adaptations of "Adventure 02" episodes. Eventually the UK comics were given their own original stories, which appeared in both the UK's official "Digimon Magazine" and the official UK Fox Kids companion magazine, "Wickid". These original stories only roughly followed the continuity of "Adventure 02". When the comic switched to the "Tamers" series the storylines adhered to continuity more strictly; sometimes it would expand on subject matter not covered by the original Japanese anime (such as Mitsuo Yamaki's past) or the English adaptations of the television shows and movies (such as Ryo's story or the movies that remained undubbed until 2005). In a money saving venture, the original stories were later removed from "Digimon Magazine", which returned to printing translated German adaptations of "Tamers" episodes. Eventually, both magazines were cancelled.
Video games.
The "Digimon" series has a large number of video games which usually have their own independent storylines with a few sometimes tying into the stories of the anime series or manga series. The games consists of a number of genres including life simulation, adventure, video card game, strategy and racing games, though they are mainly action role-playing games. 
In late 2009, Bandai created a webpage in Japanese showing a new game to be released in 2010 called "", which uses the same engine as their predecessors "Digimon World DS" and "Digimon World Dawn and Dusk" and was released on July 1, 2010. In February 2010, a website for the online multiplayer game, "Digimon Battle Online", was launched, showing it to be based primarily in the world of the Tamers saga and its characters.
On September 22, 2011, online game publisher Joymax announced the release of an MMORPG game called "Digimon Masters", which was developed by the Korean publisher DIGITALIC.
In 2011, Bandai posted a countdown on a teaser site. Once the countdown was finished, it revealed a reboot of the Digimon World series titled "". An enhanced version of the game released on Nintendo 3DS as "Digimon World Re:Digitize Decode" in 2013.
A new fighting game for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 was revealed in the summer of 2014, named "Digimon All-Star Rumble". It was released in North America, Europe and Australia in November of the same year. "", a role-playing game in the "Digimon Story" sub-series, was released in 2015 for PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 4 in Japan. It has also been released with English subtitles in North America and the rest of the world in 2016.
Card game.
The Digimon Collectible Card Game is a card game based on Digimon, first introduced in Japan in 1997 and published by Bandai. The third season ("Digimon Tamers") utilized this aspect of the franchise by making the card game an integral part of the season. Versions of the card game are also included in some of the Digimon video games including "Digital Card Battle" and "Digimon World 3".

