
The Demographics of Venezuela are the condition and overview of Venezuela's peoples. Demographic topics include basic education, health, and population statistics as well as identified racial and religious affiliations
The Venezuelan people comprise a combination of heritages. The historically present Amerindians, Spanish colonists, and African slaves have all contributed to varying degrees. Later, waves of European groups (Italians, Spanish, Portuguese and Germans) migrated to Venezuela in the 20th century, influencing many aspects of Venezuelan life, including its culture, language, food, and music.
About 51.6% of the population is mixed (mestizo) white, Amerindian and black in Venezuela, while 46.6% are white or of European ancestry. Another 3.7% is predominantly/fully African, while 2.7% is of predominant/full Amerindian ancestry, and 1.0% other races (mainly Asians).
Three Amerindian tribes located in the country are the Wayuu, located in the west, in Zulia State, and the Timoto-cuicas, also in the west, in Mérida State, in the Andes.
About 85% of the population live in urban areas in the northern portion of the country and currently resides in the urban conglomerations (Caracas, Maracay, Maracaibo, Valencia, etc.) that are concentrated in Venezuela's northern coastal mountain strip. Nearly half of Venezuela's geographic area lies south of the Orinoco River; however, this region contains only 5% of the Venezuelan population.
 estimate puts Venezuela's total population at inhabitants. Additionally, over the past five years, Venezuelan society's general age structure has been trending towards the homologous structure found in Cuba, Western Europe, Japan, and other healthy and rapidly aging societies. Notably, there has been a significant increase in the proportion and gross numbers of elderly Venezuelans (aged 65 and up), as well as a corresponding drop in the total fertility.
Population.
According to the total population was in , compared to only 5,482,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 29.5%, 64.9% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 5.6% was 65 years or older
Structure of the population.
Structure of the population (01.07.2011) (Data refer to projections based on the 2001 Population Census) :
Structure of the population (01.07.2013) (Data refer to projections based on the 2001 Population Census) :
Vital statistics.
Registration of vital events in Venezuela is not complete. The Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.
Other demographic statistics.
Demographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2019.
Demographic statistics according to the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
unspecified Spanish, Italian (13–16%), Portuguese (1.4%), Arab (5%), German (&lt;0.1%), African (3.4%), indigenous peoples (2.7%)
Spanish (official), numerous indigenous dialects
definition: age 15 and over can read and write (2016 est.)
Race.
According to an autosomal DNA genetic study conducted in 2008 by the University of Brasilia (UNB) the composition of Venezuela's population is: 60.60% of European contribution, 23% of Amerindian contribution and 16.30% of African contribution. 3.6% of Venezuelans are fully black, but Mulattos (black mixed with white) are a much larger proportion. With many Venezuelans having African ancestry.
Religious affiliation.
The overwhelming majority of Venezuelans denote themselves as adherents of Catholicism; this is true nominally if not in practice.
According to the 2011 census, 88.3 percent of the population is Christian, primarily Roman Catholic (71%), 17 percent Protestant, and the remaining 0.03 percent Mormons (LDS Church). The Venezuelans without religion are 9% (atheist 2%, agnostic or indifferent 6% and doesn't know/doesn't respond 1% ), almost 3% of the population follow other religions (1% of them are of Santería).

