
Do Not Adjust Your Set (DNAYS) is a British television series produced originally by Rediffusion, London, then, by the fledgling Thames Television for British commercial television channel ITV from 26 December 1967 to 14 May 1969. The show took its name from the message (frequently seen on the TV screen in those days) which was displayed when there was a problem with transmission.
It helped launch the careers of Denise Coffey, David Jason, Eric Idle, Terry Jones, and Michael Palin; the last three became members of the Monty Python comedy troupe soon afterwards. Although originally conceived as a children's programme, it quickly acquired a fandom amongst adults, including future Pythons John Cleese and Graham Chapman.
Satirical comedy/art/pop group The Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band also performed songs in each programme and frequently appeared as extras in sketches. The programme itself comprised a series of satirical sketches, often presented in a surreal, absurd and discontinuous style which anticipates "Monty Python's Flying Circus", which followed five months after the last episode of "DNAYS". Strange animations between sketches were crafted for the final episodes by Terry Gilliam, who soon graduated to "Python" with Palin, Jones and Idle – part of Gilliam's "Christmas cards" animation reappeared there in the "Joy to the World" segment.
One recurring feature of the show was "Captain Fantastic", a superhero parody featuring David Jason in farcical and morbid adventures against villainess Mrs. Black (Coffey). These segments were shot entirely on location in London. The feature was so popular with the young audience that after DNAYS itself ended, Captain Fantastic briefly continued in its own capacity.
In 1968, DNAYS won an international award, the Prix Jeunesse, in Munich.
DVD release.
Nine of the 14 episodes from the first (Rediffusion) series were released on DVD in the UK and the US in August 2005. Both releases use the same NTSC Region 0 discs made from telerecordings of the original videotapes. In this DVD release, the episodes are numbered 1 to 9, although, in fact, they are episodes 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 from series 1 (a similar fault was made on the release of "At Last the 1948 Show"). The sole surviving episode from series 2 and "Do Not Adjust Your Stocking" were not included. Contrary to claims on the packaging, Terry Gilliam's animations also do not appear on this release, although Gilliam does appear as one of the additional writers in the credits for episodes three and four. The Bonzo Dog Doo Dah Band are seen playing their song "Death Cab for Cutie" (also performed in the Beatles' film "Magical Mystery Tour") on the DVD, Episode 7.
On 16 September 2019, The British Film Institute released a comprehensive DVD set of the surviving videos and animations from both series. It includes the previously missing 4th episode of the first series, which was rediscovered (but only after the earlier DVD release) when it was noticed that a copy had been sent to the jury of the Prix de Jeunesse award. The video of this surviving episode was a semi-professional videotape copy made in the Thames era, and is thus the only series 1 episode with magnetic rather than optical sound quality. The BFI release features episodes with their original numbering. They include the Christmas special and some Terry Gilliam animations (restored from his own masters) that appeared in otherwise lost episodes.

