
 was the 56th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.
Seiwa's reign spanned the years from 858 through 876.
Traditional narrative.
Seiwa was the fourth son of Emperor Montoku. His mother was Empress Dowager Fujiwara no Akirakeiko (明子), also called the Somedono empress 染殿后). Seiwa's mother was the daughter of Fujiwara no Yoshifusa (藤原良房), who was regent and great minister of the council of state.
He was the younger half-brother of Imperial Prince Koretaka (惟喬親王; 844–897)
Imina.
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his "imina") was , the first member of the Imperial house to be personally named "-hito" 仁. One meaning of the character 仁 is the Confucian concept of "ren". Later it has been a tradition to name the personal name of all male members of the Imperial family this way.
He was also known as emperor as "Mizunoo-no-mikado" or "Minoo-tei".
Events of Seiwa's life.
Originally under the guardianship of his maternal grandfather Fujiwara no Yoshifusa, he displaced Imperial Prince Koretaka (惟喬親王) as Crown Prince. Upon the death of his father in 858, Emperor Montoku, he became Emperor at the age of 9, but the real power was held by his grandfather, Yoshifusa.
Mausoleum.
The actual site of Seiwa's grave is known. The emperor is traditionally venerated at the "misasagi" memorial shrine in the Ukyō-ku ward of Kyoto. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Seiwa's mausoleum. It is formally named the or Seiwa Tennō Ryō. From the site of his tomb the Emperor Seiwa is sometimes referred to as the . The "kami" of Emperor Seiwa is venerated at the Seiwatennō-sha in close proximity to the mausoleum.
Kugyō.
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.
In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Seiwa's reign, this apex of the "Daijō-kan" included:
Eras of Seiwa's reign.
The years of Seiwa's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or "nengō".
Consorts and children.
Consort (Nyōgo) later "Kōtaigō": Fujiwara no Takako (藤原高子; 842–910) later Nijo-kisaki (二条后), Fujiwara no Nagara's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no Tamiko (藤原多美子; d. 886), Fujiwara no Yoshimi's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Taira no "Kanshi" (平寛子)
Consort (Nyōgo): Princess "Kashi" (嘉子女王)
Consort (Nyōgo): Minamoto no Sadako (源貞子; d. 873)
Consort (Nyōgo): Princess "Ryūshi" (隆子女王)
Consort (Nyōgo): Princess "Kenshi" (兼子女王)
Consort (Nyōgo): Princess "Chūshi"/Tadako (忠子女王; 854–904), Emperor Kōkō's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no Yoriko (藤原頼子; d. 936), Fujiwara no Mototsune's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no Kazuko (藤原佳珠子; b. 856), Fujiwara no Mototsune's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Minamoto no Takeko/Izuko (源厳子; d. 879), Minamoto no Yoshiari's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Minamoto no "Seishi" (源済子), Emperor Montoku's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Minamoto no "Kenshi"/Atsuko (源喧子)
Consort (Nyōgo): Minamoto no "Gishi"/Yoshiko (源宜子), Minamoto no Okimoto's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Ariwara no Fumiko (在原文子), Ariwara no Yukihira's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Yoshichika's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Tachibana no Yasukage's daughter (d. 924)
Court Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Nakamune's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Prince Munesada's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Sadamune's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Morofuji's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Morokazu's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Saeki no Sanefusa's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Ben-no-miyasundokoro (弁の御息所), Ōe no Otondo's daughter
Court lady: Kamo no Mineo's daughter
Court lady: Ōno no Takatori's daughter
See also.
 

