
 was the 69th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.
Go-Suzaku's reign spanned the years from 1036 through 1045.
This 11th-century sovereign was named after the 10th-century Emperor Suzaku and "go-" (後), translates literally as "later;" and thus, he is sometimes called the "Later Emperor Suzaku". The Japanese word "go" has also been translated to mean the "second one;" and in some older sources, this emperor may be identified as "Suzaku, the second" or as "Suzaku II."
Biography.
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his "imina") was Atsunaga"-shinnō" (敦良親王).
His father was Emperor Ichijō. His mother was Fujiwara no Akiko/Shōshi (藤原彰子), the daughter of Fujiwara no Michinaga (藤原道長). He was the younger brother and heir to Emperor Go-Ichijō.
Go-Suzaku had five Empresses and seven Imperial children.
Events of Go-Suzaku's life.
The actual site of Go-Suzaku's grave is unknown. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine ("misasagi") at Kyoto.
The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Go-Suzaku's mausoleum. It is formally named "Enjō-ji no misasagi".
Go-Suzaku is buried amongst the "Seven Imperial Tombs" at Ryōan-ji Temple in Kyoto.
The specific mound which commemorates the Hosokawa Emperor Go-Suzaku is today named "Shu-zan."
The emperor's burial place would have been quite humble in the period after Go-Suzaku died.
These tombs reached their present state as a result of the 19th century restoration of imperial sepulchers ("misasagi") which were ordered by Emperor Meiji.
The final resting place of Emperor Go-Suzaku's consort, Teishi Nai-shinnō (1013–1094), is here as well.
Kugyō.
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Even during those years in which the court's actual influence outside the palace walls was minimal, the hierarchic organization persisted.
In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Go-Suzaku's reign, this apex of the "Daijō-kan included: 
Eras of Go-Suzaku's reign.
The years of Go-Suzaku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or "nengō".
Consorts and children.
Empress ("kōgō"): Imperial Princess Teishi (禎子内親王; 1013–1094) later Yōmeimon’in (陽明門院), Emperor Sanjō‘s 3rd daughter
Empress ("chūgū"): Fujiwara no Genshi (藤原嫄子; 1016–1039), Imperial Prince Atsuyasu's daughter and Fujiwara no Yorimichi‘s adopted daughter
Crown Princess (died before Emperor's accession): Fujiwara no Yoshiko (藤原嬉子; 1007-1025), Fujiwara no Michinaga‘s 6th daughter 
Consort ("Nyōgo"): Fujiwara no Nariko/"Seishi" (藤原生子; 1014–1068), Fujiwara no Norimichi‘s eldest daughter
Consort ("Nyōgo"): Fujiwara no Nobuko/"Enshi" (藤原延子; 1016–1095), Fujiwara no Yorimune‘s 2nd daughter
See also.
 

