
Eth (, uppercase: Ð, lowercase: ð; also spelled edh or eð) known as ðæt in Old English, is a letter used in Old English, Middle English, Icelandic, Faroese (in which it is called "edd"), and Elfdalian. 
It was also used in Scandinavia during the Middle Ages, but was subsequently replaced with "dh", and later "d". 
It is often transliterated as "d". 
The lowercase version has been adopted to represent a voiced dental fricative in the International Phonetic Alphabet.
Old English.
In Old English, "ð" (called "") was used interchangeably with "þ" to represent the Old English dental fricative phoneme or its allophone , which exist in modern English phonology as the voiced and voiceless dental fricatives both now spelled "th".
Unlike the runic letter þ, ð is a modified Roman letter. Neither ð nor þ were found in the earliest records of Old English. A study of Mercian royal diplomas found that ð (along with đ) began to emerge in the early 8th century, with ð becoming strongly preferred by the 780s. Another source indicates that the letter is "derived from Irish writing". 
Under King Ælfred the Great, þ grew greatly in popularity and started to overtake ð. Þ completely overtook ð by Middle English, and þ died out by Early Modern English, mostly due to the rise of the printing press, and was replaced by the digraph "th". 
Lower case version.
The lowercase (minuscule) version has retained the curved shape of a medieval scribe's "d", which "d" itself in general has not.
Icelandic.
In Icelandic, "ð", called "eð", represents a voiced dental fricative , which is the same as the "th" in English "that", but it never appears as the first letter of a word. At the end of words as well as within words when it's followed by a voiceless consonant, "ð" is devoiced to , such . The "ð" in the name of the letter is devoiced in the Nominative and Accusative cases . In the Icelandic alphabet, "ð" follows "d".
Faroese.
In Faroese, "ð" is not assigned to any particular phoneme and appears mostly for etymological reasons, but it indicates most glides. When "ð" appears before "r", it is in a few words pronounced . In the Faroese alphabet, "ð" follows "d".
In Olav Jakobsen Høyem's version of based on , "ð" was always silent, and was introduced for etymological reasons.
Welsh.
"Ð" has also been used by some in written Welsh to represent , which is normally represented as "dd".
Khmer.
"Ð" used in Khmer romanization, e.g. "preðh riðciðnaacak kampucið" (Kingdom of Cambodia).
Phonetic transcription.
 is used in phonetic transcription.
 is used in the Uralic Phonetic Alphabet.
Computer input.
The Faroese and Icelandic keyboard layouts have a dedicated button for eth.
On Microsoft Windows, eth can be typed using the alt code +() for lowercase or +() for uppercase, or by typing using the US International keyboard layout.
On macOS, eth can be typed by activating the ABC Extended keyboard layout and typing .
Using the compose key ("multi key") which is popular on Linux, eth can be typed by typing for lowercase or for capital letters.
On Chrome OS with 'extended keyboard' Chrome extension, will result in ð being displayed; will result in Ð.
Modern uses.
This operator gives rise to spin-weighted spherical harmonics.

