
Edward Davis Wood Jr. (October 10, 1924 – December 10, 1978) was an American filmmaker, 
actor, and author.
In the 1950s, Wood directed several low-budget science fiction, crime and horror films, notably "Glen or Glenda" (1953), "Jail Bait" (1954), "Bride of the Monster" (1955), "Plan 9 from Outer Space" (1959), "Night of the Ghouls" (1959) and "The Sinister Urge" (1960). In the 1960s and 1970s, he moved towards sexploitation and pornographic films, and wrote over 80 pulp crime, horror and sex novels. 
Notable for their 
campy aesthetics, technical errors, unsophisticated special effects, use of ill-fitting stock footage, eccentric casts, idiosyncratic stories and non sequitur dialogue, Wood's films remained largely obscure until he was posthumously awarded a Golden Turkey Award for Worst Director of All Time in 1980, renewing public interest in his life and work.
Following the publication of Rudolph Grey's 1992 oral biography "Nightmare of Ecstasy: The Life and Art of Edward D. Wood Jr.", a biopic of his life, "Ed Wood" (1994), was directed by Tim Burton. Starring Johnny Depp as Wood, the film received critical acclaim and various awards, including two Academy Awards.
Early years.
Wood's father, Edward Sr., worked for the United States Post Office Department as a custodian, and his family relocated numerous times around the United States. Eventually, they settled in Poughkeepsie, New York, where Ed Wood Jr. was born in 1924. According to Wood's second wife, Kathy O'Hara, Wood's mother Lillian would dress him in girl's clothing when he was a child because she had always wanted a daughter. For the rest of his life, Wood crossdressed, infatuated with the feel of angora on his skin.
During his childhood, Wood was interested in the performing arts and pulp fiction. He collected comics and pulp magazines, and adored movies, especially Westerns, serials, and anything involving the occult. Buck Jones and Bela Lugosi were two of his earliest childhood idols. He often skipped school, in favor of watching motion pictures at the local movie theater, where stills from that day's film would often be thrown into the trash by theater staff, allowing Wood to salvage the images, and to add to his extensive collection.
On his 12th birthday, in 1936, Wood received as a gift his first movie camera, a Kodak "Cine Special". One of his first pieces of footage, and one that imbued him with pride, showed the airship "Hindenburg" passing over the Hudson River at Poughkeepsie, shortly before its disastrous crash at Lakehurst, New Jersey. One of Wood's first paid jobs was as a cinema usher, and he also sang and played drums in a band. Subsequently, he formed a quartet called "Eddie Wood's Little Splinters" in which he sang and played multiple stringed instruments.
Military service.
In 1942, Wood enlisted in the United States Marine Corps, just months after the attack on Pearl Harbor. Assigned to the 2nd Defense Battalion, he reached the rank of corporal before he was discharged. Although Wood reportedly claimed to have faced strenuous combat, including having his front teeth knocked out by a Japanese rifleman, his military records reveal this to be false; apart from recovering bodies on Betio following the Battle of Tarawa, and experiencing minor Japanese bombing raids on Betio and the Ellice Islands, a recurring filariasis infection left him performing clerical work for the remainder of his enlistment, and his dental extractions were carried out over several months by Navy dentists, unconnected to any combat. Wood later claimed (erroneously or otherwise) that he feared being wounded in battle more than he feared being killed, mainly because he was afraid a combat medic would discover him wearing a bra and panties under his uniform during the Battle of Tarawa.
Career.
Directing and screenwriting.
In 1947, Wood moved to Hollywood, California, where he wrote scripts and directed television pilots, commercials and several forgotten micro-budget westerns with names such as "Crossroads of Laredo" and "Crossroad Avenger: The Legend of the Tucson Kid". In 1948, Wood wrote, produced, directed, and starred in "Casual Company", a play derived from his unpublished novel, which was based on his service in the United States Marine Corps. It opened at the Village Playhouse to negative reviews on October 25.
In 1952, Wood was introduced to actor Bela Lugosi by friend and fellow writer-producer Alex Gordon, Wood's roommate at the time, who was later involved in creating American International Pictures. Lugosi's son, Bela Lugosi Jr., has been among those who felt Wood exploited the senior Lugosi's stardom, taking advantage of the fading actor when he could not refuse any work. However, most documents and interviews with other Wood associates in "Nightmare of Ecstasy" suggest that Wood and Lugosi were genuine friends and that Wood helped Lugosi through the worst days of his clinical depression and drug addiction. Lugosi had become dependent on morphine as a way of controlling his debilitating sciatica over the years, and was in a poor physical state.
Wood billed himself under a number of different pseudonyms, including Ann Gora (in reference to Angora, his favorite female textile) and Akdov Telmig (the backwards form of his favorite drink, the vodka gimlet).
"Glen or Glenda".
In 1953, Wood wrote and directed the semi-documentary film "Glen or Glenda" (originally titled "I Changed My Sex!") with producer George Weiss. The film starred Wood (under the alias "Daniel Davis"), his girlfriend Dolores Fuller, and Lugosi as the god-like narrator.
"Jail Bait".
Wood directed and produced a crime film, "Jail Bait" (1954, originally titled "The Hidden Face"), along with co-writer Alex Gordon, which starred Lyle Talbot and Steve Reeves (in one of his first acting jobs). Bela Lugosi was supposed to play the lead role of the plastic surgeon, but was busy with another project when filming started and had to bow out.
"Bride of the Monster".
Wood produced and directed the horror film "Bride of the Monster" (1955, originally titled "Bride of the Atom"), based on an original story idea by Alex Gordon which he had originally titled "The Atomic Monster". It starred Bela Lugosi, Swedish wrestler Tor Johnson, and Loretta King.
"Plan 9 from Outer Space".
In 1956, Wood produced, wrote, and directed the science fiction film "Plan 9 from Outer Space" (originally titled "Grave Robbers from Outer Space"), which featured Lugosi in a small role (his final film role; Lugosi died before production began), Tor Johnson, Vampira (Maila Nurmi), Tom Mason (who doubled for Lugosi in most scenes), and the Amazing Criswell as the film's narrator. "Plan 9" premiered (as "Grave Robbers") at a very small screening in 1957, was only released theatrically under the title "Plan Nine from Outer Space" in 1959, and was finally sold to late night television in 1961, thereby finding its audience over the years.
It became Wood's best-known film and received a cult following after 1980, when Michael Medved declared this film "the worst film ever made" in his book "The Golden Turkey Awards".
"The Violent Years".
In 1956 Wood wrote the screenplay for the film "The Violent Years" (originally titled "Teenage Girl Gang"), which was directed by William M. Morgan, starring "Playboy" model Jean Moorhead.
"Final Curtain".
In 1957 Wood wrote and directed a pilot for a suspense-horror TV series that ultimately failed to sell. "Final Curtain" sees an old and world-weary actor wandering in an empty theatre, imagining ghosts and strange beings haunting the backstage area. The episode has no dialogue, and Dudley Manlove narrates the thoughts of Duke Moore as the actor. Parts of the pilot were recycled for use in "Night Of The Ghouls". A complete copy of the episode was thought forever lost, before an intact print was located circa 2010. It was remastered and given its first ever cinema showing in February 2012. It is widely available online and on disc.
"Night of the Ghouls".
In 1958 Wood wrote, produced, and directed "Night of the Ghouls" (originally titled "Revenge of the Dead"), starring Kenne Duncan, Tor Johnson (reprising his role as "Lobo" from "Bride of the Monster"), Criswell, Duke Moore, and Valda Hansen. The film may have been released marginally in March 1959, and then promptly vanished from sight. For many years, it was thought to be a lost film, but the negative had really been sitting in a film laboratory for 25 years -- because Wood hadn't paid his lab bill. A video producer paid the bill and released the film on videocassette in 1984.
In 1958 Wood also co-wrote the screenplay for "The Bride and the Beast" (1958), which was directed by Adrian Weiss.
"The Sinister Urge".
Wood wrote and directed the exploitation film "The Sinister Urge" (1960), starring Kenne Duncan, Duke Moore, and Carl Anthony. Filmed in just five days, this is the last mainstream film Wood directed, although it has grindhouse elements. The film contains an "eerily prescient" scene, in which Carl Anthony's character states, "I look at this slush, and I try to remember, at one time, I made good movies".
The scenes of teenagers at a pizza place had been shot in 1956 for Wood's unfinished juvenile delinquency film "Rock and Roll Hell" (a.k.a. "Hellborn")
"Orgy of the Dead".
In 1963, Wood wrote the screenplay for "Shotgun Wedding" (an exploitation film about hillbillies marrying child brides) and his 1965 transitional film "Orgy of the Dead" (originally titled "Nudie Ghoulies"), combining the horror and grindhouse skin-flick genres. Wood handled various production details while Stephen C. Apostolof directed under the pseudonym A. C. Stephen. The film begins with a recreation of the opening scene from the then-unreleased "Night of the Ghouls". Criswell, wearing one of Lugosi's old capes, rises from his coffin to deliver an introduction taken almost word-for-word from the previous film. Set in a misty graveyard, the Lord of the Dead (Criswell) and his sexy consort, the Black Ghoul (a Vampira look-alike), preside over a series of macabre performances by topless dancers from beyond the grave (recruited by Wood from local strip clubs). The film also features a Wolf Man and a Mummy. Together, Wood and Apostolof went on to make a string of sexploitation films up to 1977. Wood co-wrote the screenplays and occasionally acted. 
"Venus Flytrap" (1970) aka "The Revenge of Dr. X", a US/Japan horror film, was based on an unproduced Ed Wood screenplay from the 1950s.
"Necromania".
In 1969, Wood appeared in "The Photographer" (a.k.a. "Love Feast" or "Pretty Models All in a Row"), the first of two films produced by a Marine buddy, Joseph F. Robertson, portraying a photographer using his position to engage in sexual antics with models. He had a smaller role in Robertson's second film, "Mrs. Stone's Thing", as a transvestite who spends his time at a party trying on lingerie in a bedroom.
In 1970, Wood made his own pornographic film, "Take It Out in Trade". The following year, he produced, wrote, and directed "Necromania" (sometimes subtitled "A Tale of Weird Love") under the pseudonym "Don Miller". The film was an early entry to the new subgenre of hardcore pornographic film. Thought lost for years, it resurfaced in edited form on Mike Vraney's Something Weird imprint in the late 1980s, then was re-released on DVD by Fleshbot Films in 2005.
Throughout the 1970s, Wood worked with friend Stephen C. Apostolof, usually co-writing scripts, but also serving as an assistant director and associate producer. (Together they had made Wood's "Orgy of the Dead" in 1965.) His last known on-screen appearance was in Apostolof's "Fugitive Girls" (a.k.a. "Five Loose Women") in 1974, where he played both a gas station attendant called "Pops" and a sheriff on the women's trail.
Books and novels.
Beginning in the early 1960s up until his death, Wood wrote at least 80 lurid crime and sex novels in addition to hundreds of short stories and non-fiction pieces for magazines and daily newspapers. Thirty-two stories known to be written by Wood (he sometimes wrote under pseudonyms such as "Ann Gora" and "Dr. T.K. Peters") are collected in "Blood Splatters Quickly", published by OR Books in 2014. Novels include "Black Lace Drag" (1963) (reissued in 1965 as "Killer in Drag"), "Orgy of the Dead" (1965), "Devil Girls" (1967), "Death of a Transvestite" (1967), "The Sexecutives" (1968), "The Photographer" (1969), "Take It Out in Trade" (1970), "The Only House in Town" (1970), "Necromania" (1971), "The Undergraduate" (1972), "A Study of Fetishes and Fantasies" (1973) and "Fugitive Girls" (1974). 
In "Nightmare of Ecstasy", Maila Nurmi said she declined Wood's offer to do a nude scene sitting in a coffin for the film version of his "Necromania", claiming she was recovering from a major stroke at the time.
In 1965, Wood wrote the quasi-memoir "Hollywood Rat Race", which was eventually published in 1998. In it, Wood advises new writers to "just keep on writing. Even if your story gets worse, you'll get better", and also recounts tales of dubious authenticity, such as how he and Bela Lugosi entered the world of nightclub cabaret.
Personal life.
Relationships and marriages.
Wood had a long-term relationship with actress and songwriter Dolores Fuller, whom he met in late 1952. The two lived together for a time and Wood cast Fuller in three of his films: "Glen or Glenda", "Jail Bait", and in a very brief appearance, in "Bride of the Monster". Fuller later said she initially had no idea that Wood was a crossdresser and was mortified when she saw Wood dressed as a woman in "Glen or Glenda". The couple broke up in 1955 after Wood cast another actress in the lead role of "Bride of the Monster" (Wood originally wrote the part for Fuller but later reduced her part to a very brief cameo) and because of Wood's excessive drinking.
While making "Bride of the Monster" in late 1955, Wood married Norma McCarty. McCarty appeared as Edie, the airplane stewardess in "Plan 9 from Outer Space". They broke up in 1956, and while it has been reported that the marriage was annulled, according to film archivist Wade Williams, they neither annulled the marriage nor divorced.
Wood married his second wife, Kathy O'Hara, in 1959. They remained married until Wood's death in 1978. Kathy died on June 26, 2006, having never remarried.
Cross-dressing.
In Rudolph Grey's 1992 biography "Nightmare of Ecstasy: The Life and Art of Edward D. Wood Jr.", Wood's wife Kathy recalls that Wood told her that his mother dressed him in girls' clothing as a child. Kathy stated that Wood's cross-dressing, at that time called transvestitism, was not a sexual inclination, but rather a neomaternal comfort derived mainly from angora fabric (angora is featured in many of Wood's films). Even in his later years, Wood was not shy about going out in public dressed in drag as Shirley, his female alter ego (who also appeared in many of his screenplays and stories). In his partly autobiographical film "Glen or Glenda", the heterosexual Wood takes pains to emphasize that a male transvestite is not automatically, or even usually, also a homosexual. At least one edition of Wood's films on DVD includes a brief silent 8mm cine clip of Wood in drag.
Death.
By 1978, Wood's depression had worsened, and he and his wife Kathy had both become alcoholics. They were evicted from their Hollywood apartment on Yucca Street on Thursday, December 7, 1978 in total poverty. The couple moved into the North Hollywood apartment of their friend, actor Peter Coe. Wood spent the weekend drinking vodka. Around noon on Sunday, December 10, Wood felt ill and went to lie down in Coe's bedroom while the others were watching a football game on TV. From the bedroom, he asked Kathy to bring him a drink, which she refused to do. A few minutes later he yelled out, "Kathy, I can't breathe!", a plea Kathy ignored as she later said she was tired of Wood bossing her around. After hearing no movement in the bedroom for 20 minutes, Kathy sent a friend to check on Wood, who discovered him dead from a heart attack. Kathy later said, "I still remember when I went into that room that afternoon and he was dead, his eyes and mouth were wide open. I'll never forget the look in his eyes. He clutched at the sheets. It looked like he'd seen hell."
Wood was cremated, and his ashes were scattered at sea.
Legacy and homages.
In 1986 in an essay paying homage to Wood in "Incredibly Strange Films", Jim Morton wrote: "Eccentric and individualistic, Edward D. Wood Jr. was a man born to film. Lesser men, if forced to make movies under the conditions Wood faced, would have thrown up their hands in defeat".
In 1994 director Tim Burton released the biopic "Ed Wood", starring Johnny Depp in the title role and Martin Landau, who won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Bela Lugosi. It also won an Academy Award for Best Makeup for Rick Baker. Conrad Brooks appeared in the movie, in a cameo role of Barman, along with Gregory Walcott as a potential Backer.
The film premiered on September 30, 1994, just ten days before what would have been Wood's 70th birthday. Despite receiving mass critical acclaim, the movie did poorly at the box office; however, it has since developed a cult following.
In 1996 Reverend Steve Galindo of Seminole, Oklahoma, created a legally recognized religion with Wood as its official savior. Founded as a joke, the Church of Ed Wood now boasts more than 3,500 baptized followers. Woodites, as Galindo's followers are called, celebrate "Woodmas" on October 10, which was Wood's birthday. Numerous parties and concerts are held worldwide to celebrate Woodmas. On October 4–5, 2003, horror host Mr. Lobo was canonized as the "Patron Saint of late night movie hosts and insomniacs" in the Church of Ed Wood.
In 1997 the University of Southern California began holding an annual "Ed Wood Film Festival", in which student teams are challenged to write, film, and edit an Ed Wood-inspired short film based on a preassigned theme. Past themes have included "Rebel Without a Bra" (2004), "What's That in Your Pocket?" (2005), and "Slippery When Wet" (2006).
Lost films.
Wood's 1972 film "The Undergraduate" was a lost film, as was his 1970 film "Take It Out in Trade". But an 80-minute print of the latter was discovered and publicly exhibited at Anthology Film Archives in New York City in September 2014. Silent outtakes from the film were released by Something Weird Video. (Both films in their entirety are available on DVD. Wood only wrote the screenplay for The Undergraduate, he did not direct it.)
Wood's 1971 film "Necromania" was also believed lost for years until an edited version resurfaced at a yard sale in 1992, followed by a complete, unedited print in 2001. 
A complete print of the previously lost Wood pornographic film, "The Young Marrieds" (1972), was discovered in 2004. It was released by Alpha Blue Archives in July 2014, as a part of the four-DVD set "The Lost Sex Films of Ed Wood Jr.".
According to Chaney biographer Don. G. Smith, the story that Ed Wood filmed a few scenes of Lon Chaney Jr. in a werewolf costume in Hollywood in 1964, which Jerry Warren incorporated into his film "Face of the Screaming Werewolf", is unsubstantiated.

