
 was the 58th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.
Kōkō reigned from 884 to 887.
Traditional narrative.
Before the emperor's ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his name ("imina") was or "Komatsu-tei". He would later be identified sometimes as "the Emperor of Komatsu". This resulted in the later Emperor Go-Komatsu adopting this name ("go-" meaning "later", so "Later Emperor Komatsu" or "Emperor Komatsu II").
Tokiyatsu "Shinnō" was the third son of Emperor Ninmyō. His mother was Fujiwara no Sawako.
Kōkō had Four Imperial consorts and 41 Imperial sons and daughters.
Events of Kōkō's life.
The first "kampaku" Fujiwara no Mototsune was influential in the process by which Kōkō became an emperor. At the time Emperor Yōzei was deposed, Prince Tokiaytsu was already Governor of Hitachi and Chief Minister of Ceremonies ("Jibu-kyō", 治部卿)
According to Kitabatake Chikafusa's 14th-century account, Mototsune resolved the problem of succession by simply going to visit Tokiyatsu"-shinnō", where the kampaku addressed the prince as a sovereign and assigned imperial guards. The prince signaled his acceptance by going into the imperial palanquin, which then conducted him to the emperor's residence within the palace. Curiously, he was still wearing the robes of a prince when he decided to take this ride into an entirely unanticipated future.
During his reign, Kōkō revived many ancient court rituals and ceremonies, and one example is the imperial hawking excursion to Serikawa, which had been initiated in 796 by Emperor Kanmu. This ritual event was revived by Kōkō after a lapse of 50 years.
The actual site of Kōkō's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine ("misasagi") at Kyoto.
The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kōkō's mausoleum. It is formally named "Kaguragaoka no Higashi no misasagi".
Kugyō.
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.
In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Kōkō's reign, this apex of the "Daijō-kan" included:
Eras of Kōkō's reign.
The years of Kōkō's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or "nengō".
Consorts and children.
Consort (later "Kōtaigō"): Princess "Hanshi" (班子女王; 833–900) later Toin-Kisaki (洞院后), Imperial Prince Nakano's daughter (son of Emperor Kanmu)
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no Kamiko (藤原佳美子; d. 898), Fujiwara no Mototsune's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Fujiwara no Genjiko (藤原元善子), Fujiwara no Yamakage's daughter
Consort (Nyōgo): Taira no Motoko/"Tōshi" (平等子), Taira no Yoshikaze's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Shigeno no Naoko (滋野直子; d. 915)
Court Attendant (Koui): Sanuki no Naganao's daughter
Court Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara Motoko (藤原元子)
Court lady: Sugawara no "Ruishi" (菅原類子), Sugawara no Koreyoshi's daughter
Court lady: Princess Keishin (桂心女王), Prince Masami's daughter
Court lady: daughter of Tajihi clan (多治氏の娘)
Court lady: A daughter of Fuse clan (布勢氏の娘)
Court Attendant (Koui): Fujiwara no Kadomune's daughter, later married Minamoto no Noboru
Poetry.
Emperor Kōkō is well-remembered for his poetry, and one of his "waka" appeared in the "Ogura Hyakunin Isshu":
References.
 

