
 was the 19th legendary Emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.
No firm dates can be assigned to this Emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 410 to 453.
Legendary narrative.
Ingyō is regarded by historians as a "legendary Emperor" of the 5th century. The reign of Emperor Kinmei ( – 571 AD), the 29th Emperor, is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early Emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737–806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty.
According to "Kojiki" and "Nihon Shoki", he was the fourth son of Emperor Nintoku and his consort Princess Iwa, and therefore a younger brother of his predecessor Emperor Hanzei. He sat on the throne after Hanzei died and ruled for 41 years. His name was .
Ingyō's contemporary title would not have been "tennō", as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jitō. Rather, it was presumably , meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven". Alternatively, Ingyō might have been referred to as or the "Great King of Yamato".
His consort was Oshisaka no Ōnakatsu no Hime. They had five sons and four daughters, including Emperor Ankō and Emperor Yūryaku. He reformed the system of family and clan names, because many named themselves false names using higher ranked clan or family names.
Events of Ingyō's reign.
The earliest documented earthquake in Japan occurred during Ingyō's reign, in 416, when the Imperial Palace at Kyoto was leveled by the severity of the Earth's tremors.
Some scholars identify Ingyō with King Sai in the "Book of Song". This would have been a king of Japan (referred to as "Wa" by contemporary Chinese scholars) who is said to have sent messengers to the Liu Song dynasty at least twice, in 443 and 451.
According to "Nihon Shoki", the king of the Korean Silla Kingdom grieved very much when Ingyō died. To comfort the soul of Ingyo, he presented Japan 80 musicians.
The actual site of Ingyō's grave is not known. The Emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine near Osaka.
The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ingyō's mausoleum. It is formally known as , in Fujiidera city near Osaka.
Consorts and children.
Empress: , Prince Wakanuke-Futamata's daughter (Emperor Ojin's son)
Consort: , Prince Wakanuke-Futamata's daughter (Emperor Ojin's son)
References.
 

