
 was the 54th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Ninmyō's reign lasted from 833 to 850, during the Heian period.
Traditional narrative.
Ninmyō was the second son of Emperor Saga and the Empress Tachibana no Kachiko. His personal name ("imina") was . After his death, he was given the title .
Ninmyō had nine Empresses, Imperial consorts, and concubines ("kōi"); and the emperor had 24 Imperial sons and daughters.
Emperor Ninmyō is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Ninmyō's mausoleum.
Events of Ninmyō's life.
Ninmyō ascended to the throne following the abdication of his uncle, Emperor Junna.
Shortly after Ninmyo was enthroned, he designated an heir. He named Prince Tsunesada, a son of former Emperor Junna, as the crown prince.
In his lifetime, Ninmyō could not have anticipated that his third son, Prince Tokiyasu, would eventually ascend the throne in 884 as Emperor Kōkō.
Eras of Ninmyō's reign.
The years of Ninmyō's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name ("nengō").
Kugyō.
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.
In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Ninmyō's reign, this apex of the "Daijō-kan" included:
Consorts and children.
Consort ("Nyōgo") later Empress Dowager ("Tai-Kōtaigō"): Fujiwara no "Junshi" (藤原順子; 809–871), Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu’s daughter
Consort ("Nyōgo"): Fujiwara no "Takushi"/Sawako (藤原沢子; d.839), Fujiwara no Fusatsugu’s daughter
Consort ("Nyōgo"): Fujiwara no "Teishi"/Sadako (藤原貞子; d.864), Fujiwara no Tadamori’s daughter
Court lady: Shigeno no Tsunako (滋野縄子), Shigeno no Sadanushi’s daughter
Consort ("Nyōgo"): Tachibana no Kageko (橘影子; d. 864), Tachibana no Ujikimi’s daughter
Consort ("Nyōgo"): Fujiwara Musuko (藤原息子)
Court Attendant ("Koui"): Ki no Taneko (紀種子; d. 869), Ki no Natora’s daughter
Court Attendant ("Koui") (deposed in 845): Mikuni-machi (三国町), daughter of Mikuni clan
Court lady: Fujiwara no Katoko (藤原賀登子), Fujiwara no Fukutomaro’s daughter
Court lady: Fujiwara no Warawako (藤原小童子), Fujiwara no Michitō’s daughter
Court lady: Princess Takamune (高宗女王), Prince Okaya’s daughter
Court lady: daughter of Yamaguchi clan (山口氏の娘)
"Nyoju": Kudaraō Toyofuku’s daughter
Court lady ("Nyoju"): Kudara no Yōkyō (百済永慶), Kudara no Kyōfuku’s daughter
External links.
 

