
The Far East is a geographical region that includes East and Southeast Asia as well as the Russian Far East. South Asia is sometimes also included for economic and cultural reasons. The term "Far East" came into use in European geopolitical discourse in the 12th century, denoting the Far East as the "farthest" of the three "easts", beyond the Near East and the Middle East. Likewise, in Qing Dynasty of the 19th and early 20th centuries the term "Tàixī ()" – i.e., anything further west than the Arab world – was used to refer to the Western countries.
Since the 1960s, East Asia has become the most common term for the region in international mass media outlets.
As in relating to the remoteness of the territory from Europe, the term "Far East" informs of an Eurocentric worldview.
Popularization.
Among Western Europeans, prior to the colonial era, "Far East" referred to anything further east than the Middle East. In the 16th century, King John III of Portugal called India a "rich and interesting country in the Far East ("Extremo Oriente")." The term was popularized during the period of the British Empire as a blanket term for lands to the east of British India.
In pre-World War I European geopolitics, the "Near East" referred to the relatively nearby lands of the Ottoman Empire, the "Middle East" denoted northwestern South Asia and Central Asia, and the "Far East" meant countries along the western Pacific Ocean and eastern Indian Ocean. Many European languages have analogous terms, such as the French ('), Spanish ('), Portuguese ('), German ('), Italian ('), Polish ('), Norwegian (') and Dutch (').
Cultural as well as geographic meaning.
Significantly, the term evokes cultural as well as geographic separation; the "Far East" is not just geographically distant, but also culturally exotic. It never refers, for instance, to the culturally Western nations of Australia and New Zealand, which lie even farther to the east of Europe than East Asia itself. This combination of cultural and geographic subjectivity was well illustrated in 1939 by Robert Menzies, a Prime Minister of Australia. Reflecting on his country's geopolitical concerns with the onset of war, Menzies commented that: 
 The problems of the Pacific are different. What Great Britain calls the Far East is to us the Near North. 
"Far East" in its usual sense is comparable to terms such as "the Orient", which means East; the "Eastern world"; or simply the "East". Southeast Asia, the Russian Far East, and occasionally South Asia might be included in the Far East to some extent.
Concerning the term, John K. Fairbank and Edwin O. Reischauer, professors of East Asian Studies at Harvard University, wrote (in "East Asia: The Great Tradition"):
Today, the term remains in the names of some longstanding institutions, including the Far Eastern Federal University in Vladivostok, Far Eastern University in Manila, the Far East University in South Korea, and "Far East", the periodical magazine of the Missionary Society of St. Columban. Furthermore, the United States and United Kingdom have historically used "Far East" for several military units and commands in the region; the Royal Navy's Far East Fleet, for instance.

