
In number theory, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, also called the unique factorization theorem or the unique-prime-factorization theorem, states that every integer greater than 1 either is a prime number itself or can be represented as the product of prime numbers and that, moreover, this representation is unique, up to (except for) the order of the factors. For example,
The theorem says two things for this example: first, that 1200 be represented as a product of primes, and second, that no matter how this is done, there will always be exactly four 2s, one 3, two 5s, and no other primes in the product.
The requirement that the factors be prime is necessary: factorizations containing composite numbers may not be unique 
(for example, formula_2).
This theorem is one of the main reasons why 1 is not considered a prime number: if 1 were prime, then factorization into primes would not be unique; for example, formula_3
Euclid's original version.
Book VII, propositions 30, 31 and 32, and Book IX, proposition 14 of Euclid's "Elements" are essentially the statement and proof of the fundamental theorem.
(In modern terminology: if a prime "p" divides the product "ab", then "p" divides either "a" or "b" or both.) Proposition 30 is referred to as Euclid's lemma, and it is the key in the proof of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
(In modern terminology: every integer greater than one is divided evenly by some prime number.) Proposition 31 is proved directly by infinite descent.
Proposition 32 is derived from proposition 31, and proves that the decomposition is possible.
(In modern terminology: a least common multiple of several prime numbers is not a multiple of any other prime number.) Book IX, proposition 14 is derived from Book VII, proposition 30, and proves partially that the decomposition is unique – a point critically noted by André Weil. Indeed, in this proposition the exponents are all equal to one, so nothing is said for the general case.
Article 16 of Gauss' "Disquisitiones Arithmeticae" is an early modern statement and proof employing modular arithmetic.
Applications.
Canonical representation of a positive integer.
Every positive integer "n" &gt; 1 can be represented in exactly one way as a product of prime powers:
where "p"1 &lt; "p"2 &lt; ... &lt; "p"k are primes and the "n""i" are positive integers. This representation is commonly extended to all positive integers, including 1, by the convention that the empty product is equal to 1 (the empty product corresponds to "k" = 0).
This representation is called the canonical representation of "n", or the standard form of "n". For example,
Factors "p"0 = 1 may be inserted without changing the value of "n" (for example, 1000 = 23×30×53). In fact, any positive integer can be uniquely represented as an infinite product taken over all the positive prime numbers:
where a finite number of the "n""i" are positive integers, and the rest are zero. Allowing negative exponents provides a canonical form for positive rational numbers.
Arithmetic operations.
The canonical representations of the product, greatest common divisor (GCD), and least common multiple (LCM) of two numbers "a" and "b" can be expressed simply in terms of the canonical representations of "a" and "b" themselves:
However, integer factorization, especially of large numbers, is much more difficult than computing products, GCDs, or LCMs. So these formulas have limited use in practice.
Arithmetic functions.
Many arithmetic functions are defined using the canonical representation. In particular, the values of additive and multiplicative functions are determined by their values on the powers of prime numbers.
Proof.
The proof uses Euclid's lemma ("Elements" VII, 30): If a prime divides the product of two integers and , then must divide at least one of those integers and .
Existence.
It must be shown that every integer greater than 1 is either prime or a product of primes. First, 2 is prime. Then, by strong induction, assume this is true for all numbers greater than 1 and less than "n". If "n" is prime, there is nothing more to prove. Otherwise, there are integers "a" and "b", where "n" = "ab", and . By the induction hypothesis, and are products of primes. But then is a product of primes.
Uniqueness.
Suppose, to the contrary, there is an integer that has two distinct prime factorizations. Let "n" be the least such integer and write "n" = "p"1 "p"2 ... "p""j" = "q"1 "q"2 ... "q""k", where each "p""i" and "q""i" is prime. (Note "j" and "k" are both at least 2.) We see "p"1 divides "q"1 "q"2 ... "q""k", so "p"1 divides some "q""i" by Euclid's lemma. Without loss of generality, say "p"1 divides "q"1. Since "p"1 and "q"1 are both prime, it follows that "p"1 = "q"1. Returning to our factorizations of "n", we may cancel these two terms to conclude "p"2 ... "p""j" = "q"2 ... "q""k". We now have two distinct prime factorizations of some integer strictly smaller than "n", which contradicts the minimality of "n".
Uniqueness without Euclid's lemma.
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic can also be proved without using Euclid's lemma. The proof that follows is inspired by Euclid's original version of the Euclidean algorithm. 
Assume that formula_7 is the smallest positive integer which is the product of prime numbers in two different ways. Incidentally, this implies that formula_7, if it exists, must be a composite number greater than formula_9. Now, say 
Every formula_11 must be distinct from every formula_12 Otherwise, if say formula_13 then there would exist some positive integer formula_14 that is smaller than and has two distinct prime factorizations. One may also suppose that formula_15 by exchanging the two factorizations, if needed.
Setting formula_16 and formula_17 one has formula_18 It follows that
As the positive integers less than have been supposed to have a unique prime factorization, formula_20 must occur in the factorization of either formula_21 or . The latter case is impossible, as , being smaller than , must have a unique prime factorization, and formula_20 differs from every formula_12 The former case is also impossible, as, if formula_20 is a divisor of formula_25 it must be also a divisor of formula_26 which is impossible as formula_20 and formula_28 are distinct primes.
Therefore, there cannot exist a smallest integer with more than a single distinct prime factorization. Every positive integer must either be a prime number itself, which would factor uniquely, or a composite that also factors uniquely into primes, or in the case of the integer formula_9, not factor into any prime.
Generalizations.
The first generalization of the theorem is found in Gauss's second monograph (1832) on biquadratic reciprocity. This paper introduced what is now called the ring of Gaussian integers, the set of all complex numbers "a" + "bi" where "a" and "b" are integers. It is now denoted by formula_30 He showed that this ring has the four units ±1 and ±"i", that the non-zero, non-unit numbers fall into two classes, primes and composites, and that (except for order), the composites have unique factorization as a product of primes.
Similarly, in 1844 while working on cubic reciprocity, Eisenstein introduced the ring formula_31, where formula_32   formula_33 is a cube root of unity. This is the ring of Eisenstein integers, and he proved it has the six units formula_34 and that it has unique factorization.
However, it was also discovered that unique factorization does not always hold. An example is given by formula_35. In this ring one has
Examples like this caused the notion of "prime" to be modified. In formula_35 it can be proven that if any of the factors above can be represented as a product, for example, 2 = "ab", then one of "a" or "b" must be a unit. This is the traditional definition of "prime". It can also be proven that none of these factors obeys Euclid's lemma; for example, 2 divides neither (1 + ) nor (1 − ) even though it divides their product 6. In algebraic number theory 2 is called irreducible in formula_35 (only divisible by itself or a unit) but not prime in formula_35 (if it divides a product it must divide one of the factors). The mention of formula_35 is required because 2 is prime and irreducible in formula_41 Using these definitions it can be proven that in any integral domain a prime must be irreducible. Euclid's classical lemma can be rephrased as "in the ring of integers formula_42 every irreducible is prime". This is also true in formula_43 and formula_44 but not in formula_45
The rings in which factorization into irreducibles is essentially unique are called unique factorization domains. Important examples are polynomial rings over the integers or over a field, Euclidean domains and principal ideal domains.
In 1843 Kummer introduced the concept of ideal number, which was developed further by Dedekind (1876) into the modern theory of ideals, special subsets of rings. Multiplication is defined for ideals, and the rings in which they have unique factorization are called Dedekind domains.
There is a version of unique factorization for ordinals, though it requires some additional conditions to ensure uniqueness.
References.
The "Disquisitiones Arithmeticae" has been translated from Latin into English and German. The German edition includes all of his papers on number theory: all the proofs of quadratic reciprocity, the determination of the sign of the Gauss sum, the investigations into biquadratic reciprocity, and unpublished notes.
The two monographs Gauss published on biquadratic reciprocity have consecutively numbered sections: the first contains §§ 1–23 and the second §§ 24–76. Footnotes referencing these are of the form "Gauss, BQ, § "n"". Footnotes referencing the "Disquisitiones Arithmeticae" are of the form "Gauss, DA, Art. "n"".
These are in Gauss's "Werke", Vol II, pp. 65–92 and 93–148; German translations are pp. 511–533 and 534–586 of the German edition of the "Disquisitiones".



