
In botany, a fruit is the seed-bearing structure in flowering plants (also known as angiosperms) formed from the ovary after flowering.
Fruits are the means by which angiosperms disseminate seeds. Edible fruits, in particular, have propagated with the movements of humans and animals in a symbiotic relationship as a means for seed dispersal and nutrition; in fact, humans and many animals have become dependent on fruits as a source of food. Accordingly, fruits account for a substantial fraction of the world's agricultural output, and some (such as the apple and the pomegranate) have acquired extensive cultural and symbolic meanings.
In common language usage, "fruit" normally means the fleshy seed-associated structures of a plant that are sweet or sour, and edible in the raw state, such as apples, bananas, grapes, lemons, oranges, and strawberries. On the other hand, in botanical usage, "fruit" includes many structures that are not commonly called "fruits", such as bean pods, corn kernels, tomatoes, and wheat grains. The section of a fungus that produces spores is also called a fruiting body.
Botanic fruit and culinary fruit.
Many common language terms used for fruit and seeds differ from botanical classifications. For example, in botany, a "fruit" is a ripened ovary or carpel that contains seeds; e.g., an apple or a pomegranate — or a tomato (see figure). A "nut" is a type of fruit (and not a seed), and a "seed" is a ripened ovule. In culinary language, a "fruit", so-called, is the sweet- or not sweet- (even sour-) tasting produce of a specific plant (e.g., a peach, pear or lemon); "nuts" are hard, oily, non-sweet plant produce in shells. "Vegetables", so called, typically are savory or non-sweet produce (e.g., zucchini, lettuce, broccoli, and tomato); but some may be sweet-tasting (e.g., sweet potato, watermelon).
Examples of botanically classified fruit that typically are called vegetables include: cucumber, pumpkin, and squash (all are cucurbits); beans, peanuts, and peas (all legumes); corn, eggplant, bell pepper (or sweet pepper), and tomato. The spices chili pepper and allspice are fruits, botanically speaking. In contrast, rhubarb is often called a fruit when used in making pies, but the edible produce of rhubarb is actually the leaf stalk, or petiole, of the plant. And edible gymnosperm seeds are often given fruit names, e.g., ginkgo nuts and pine nuts.
Botanically, a cereal grain such as corn, rice, or wheat is a kind of fruit (termed a caryopsis). However, the fruit wall is very thin and is fused to the seed coat, so almost all the edible grain-fruit is actually a seed.
Structure.
The outer, often edible layer, is the "pericarp", formed from the ovary and surrounding the seeds, although in some species other tissues contribute to or form the edible portion. The pericarp may be described in three layers from outer to inner, the "epicarp", "mesocarp" and "endocarp".
Fruit that bears a prominent pointed terminal projection is said to be "beaked".
Development.
A fruit results from maturation of one or more flowers, and the gynoecium of the flower(s) forms all or part of the fruit.
Inside the ovary/ovaries are one or more ovules where the megagametophyte contains the egg cell. After double fertilization, these ovules will become seeds. The ovules are fertilized in a process that starts with pollination, which involves the movement of pollen from the stamens to the stigma of flowers. After pollination, a tube grows from the pollen through the stigma into the ovary to the ovule and two sperm are transferred from the pollen to the megagametophyte. Within the megagametophyte one of the two sperm unites with the egg, forming a zygote, and the second sperm enters the central cell forming the endosperm mother cell, which completes the double fertilization process. Later the zygote will give rise to the embryo of the seed, and the endosperm mother cell will give rise to endosperm, a nutritive tissue used by the embryo.
As the ovules develop into seeds, the ovary begins to ripen and the ovary wall, the "pericarp", may become fleshy (as in berries or drupes), or form a hard outer covering (as in nuts). In some multiseeded fruits, the extent to which the flesh develops is proportional to the number of fertilized ovules. The pericarp is often differentiated into two or three distinct layers called the "exocarp" (outer layer, also called epicarp), "mesocarp" (middle layer), and "endocarp" (inner layer). In some fruits, especially simple fruits derived from an inferior ovary, other parts of the flower (such as the floral tube, including the petals, sepals, and stamens), fuse with the ovary and ripen with it. In other cases, the sepals, petals and/or stamens and style of the flower fall off. When such other floral parts are a significant part of the fruit, it is called an "accessory fruit". Since other parts of the flower may contribute to the structure of the fruit, it is important to study flower structure to understand how a particular fruit forms.
There are three general modes of fruit development:
Classification of fruits.
Consistent with the three modes of fruit development plant scientists have classified fruits into three main groups: simple fruits, aggregate fruits, and composite or multiple fruits. The groupings reflect how the flower organs are arranged and how the fruits develop; they are not evolutionarily relevant as diverse plant taxa may be in the same group.
Simple fruit.
Simple fruits are further classified as either dry or fleshy. Both types result from the ripening to fruit of a simple or compound ovary in a single flower with only one pistil. (In comparison, a single flower with "numerous" simple pistils typically produces an aggregate fruit.)
To distribute their seeds, dry fruits may split open and discharge their seeds to the winds, (dehiscence). Or they may rely on degradation and decay of the fruit to expose the seeds, or on the eating and excreting of fruit by frugivores to distribute seeds, (indehiscence). Fleshy fruit do not split open; they are indehiscent and they also may rely on frugivores for distribution of their seeds. Typically, the entire outer layer of the ovary wall ripens into a potentially edible pericarp.
Types of dry simple fruits (and examples) include:
Fruits in which part or all of the "pericarp" (fruit wall) is fleshy at maturity are termed "simple fleshy fruits". Types of simple fleshy fruits (with examples) include:
Berries.
Berries are a type of simple fleshy fruit that issue from a single ovary. (The ovary itself may be compound, with several carpels.) This botanical definition includes grapes, currants, cucumbers, eggplants (aubergines), tomatoes, chili peppers, and bananas; but excludes certain fruits that are called "-berry" by the culinary or common usage of the term—such as strawberries and raspberries. Berries may be formed from one or more carpels from the same flower (i.e., from the simple or compound ovary). Seeds are usually embedded in the fleshy interior of the ovary.
Examples here and in the table below:
The strawberry, regardless of its appearance, is classified as a dry, not a fleshy fruit. Botanically, it is "not" a berry; it is an aggregate-accessory fruit, the latter term meaning the fleshy part is derived not from the plant's ovaries but from the receptacle that holds the ovaries. Numerous dry, apparent "seeds" (termed achenes) are attached on the outside of the fruit-flesh; but each is actually an ovary of a flower with a seed inside (see image).
Schizocarps are dry fruits though some appear to be fleshy. They originate from syncarpous ovaries but do not actually dehisce; rather, they split into segments with one or more seeds. They include a number of different forms from a wide range of families, including carrot, parsnip, parsley, cumin.
Aggregate fruit.
An aggregate fruit is also called an "etaerio"; it develops from a single flower that presents numerous simple pistils (see graphic of raspberry). Each pistil contains one carpel; together they form a fruitlet. The ultimate development of the aggregation of pistils as fruitlets is called an aggregate fruit, etaerio fruit, or simply an etaerio.
Four types of aggregate fruits can present four different etaerios, such as achenes, drupelets, follicles, and berries. For example, the Ranunculaceae species, including "Clematis" and "Ranunculus", presents an etaerio of achenes; the "Rubus" species including raspberry: drupelets; "Calotropis" species: follicles; "Annona" species: berries.
Some other broadly recognized species and their etaerios are:
The raspberry; the pistils are called "drupelets" because each pistil is like a small drupe attached to the receptacle. In some bramble fruits such as blackberry the receptacle elongates and also develops as part of the fruit, called an accessory part, making the blackberry an "aggregate-accessory" fruit. The strawberry is also an aggregate-accessory fruit, of which the seeds are contained in achenes. In all these examples, the fruit develops from a single flower with numerous pistils.
Multiple fruits.
A multiple fruit is one formed from a cluster, 'a multiple', of flowers —(called an "inflorescence"). Each flower produces a single fruitlet, but as they mature they all merge into one mass of fruit. Examples are the pineapple, fig, mulberry, osage-orange, and breadfruit.
Progressive stages of multiple flowering and fruit development can be observed on a single branch in the Indian mulberry, or noni, (see image). First produced is an inflorescence of white flowers, called a head. After fertilization, each flower in the cluster develops into a drupe; as the drupes expand, they develop as a "connate" organ —they merge into a multiple fleshy fruit called a "syncarp". During this (first) sequence of development, a progression of second, third, and more such sequences are initiated in turn by new inflorescences at the head of the stem.
Accessory fruit.
Some or all the edible parts of accessory fruits do not issue from the ovary, a character that occurs among all three groups of simple, aggregate, or multiple fruits. Thus accessory fruits can comprise all the pistils and other parts produced from "one" flower as well as all those produced from "many" flowers.
Seedless fruits.
Seedlessness is an important feature of some fruits of commerce. Commercial cultivars of bananas and pineapples are examples of seedless fruits. Some cultivars of citrus fruits (especially grapefruit, mandarin oranges, navel oranges), satsumas, table grapes, and watermelons are valued for their seedlessness. In some species, seedlessness is the result of "parthenocarpy", where fruits set without fertilization. Parthenocarpic fruit set may or may not require pollination, but most seedless citrus fruits require a stimulus from pollination to produce fruit.
Seedless bananas and grapes are triploids, and seedlessness results from the abortion of the embryonic plant that is produced by fertilization, a phenomenon known as "stenospermocarpy", which requires normal pollination and fertilization.
Seed dissemination.
Variations in fruit structures largely depend on their seeds' mode of dispersal. This dispersal can be achieved by animals, explosive dehiscence, water, or wind.
Some fruits have coats covered with spikes or hooked burrs, either to prevent themselves from being eaten by animals, or to stick to the feathers, hairs, or legs of animals, using them as dispersal agents. Examples include cocklebur and unicorn plant.
The sweet flesh of many fruits is "deliberately" appealing to animals, so that the seeds held within are eaten and "unwittingly" carried away and deposited (i.e., defecated) at a distance from the parent. Likewise, the nutritious, oily kernels of nuts are appealing to rodents (such as squirrels), which hoard them in the soil to avoid starving during the winter, thus giving those seeds that remain uneaten the chance to germinate and grow into a new plant away from their parent.
Other fruits are elongated and flattened out naturally, and so become thin, like wings or helicopter blades, e.g., elm, maple, and tuliptree. This is an evolutionary mechanism to increase dispersal distance away from the parent, via wind. Other wind-dispersed fruit have tiny "parachutes", e.g., dandelion, milkweed, salsify.
Coconut fruits can float thousands of miles in the ocean to spread seeds. Some other fruits that can disperse via water are nipa palm and screw pine.
Some fruits fling seeds substantial distances (up to 100 m in sandbox tree) via explosive dehiscence or other mechanisms, e.g., impatiens and squirting cucumber.
Food uses.
Many hundreds of fruits, including fleshy fruits (like apple, kiwifruit, mango, peach, pear, and watermelon) are commercially valuable as human food, eaten both fresh and as jams, marmalade and other preserves. Fruits are also used in manufactured foods (e.g., cakes, cookies, ice cream, muffins, or yogurt) or beverages, such as fruit juices (e.g., apple juice, grape juice, or orange juice) or alcoholic beverages (e.g., brandy, fruit beer, or wine). Fruits are also used for gift giving, e.g., in the form of Fruit Baskets and Fruit Bouquets.
Many "vegetables" in culinary "parlance" are botanical fruits, including bell pepper, cucumber, eggplant, green bean, okra, pumpkin, squash, tomato, and zucchini. Olive fruit is pressed for olive oil. Spices like allspice, black pepper, paprika, and vanilla are derived from berries.
Storage.
All fruits benefit from proper post harvest care, and in many fruits, the plant hormone ethylene causes ripening. Therefore, maintaining most fruits in an efficient cold chain is optimal for post harvest storage, with the aim of extending and ensuring shelf life.
Nutritional value.
Excessive intake of added sugar is broadly acknowledged as harmful to humans. Adults and children who regularly consume high amounts of sugar in foods and beverages have a high risk of becoming chronically overweight (see metabolic syndrome) and to incur the serious health maladies that typically follow that status. Because fruits are relatively high in sugar it is often questioned whether fruits are a healthy food.
In fact however, it is difficult to consume excessive amounts of sugar (e. g. fructose) merely by eating fresh fruit. Various culinary fruits provide significant amounts of fiber and water and present significant resistance to chewing; many are generally high in vitamin C. An overview of numerous studies show that fruits (e.g., whole apples or whole oranges) are very satisfying (filling) in the acts of simply eating and chewing them. The fiber consumed in eating fruit promote satiety and help to control weight gain and to provide cholesterol-lowering effects.
Regular consumption of fruit is generally associated with reduced risks of several diseases and functional declines associated with aging. A current review for meta-analyses concludes that even current assessments might significantly underestimate the protective associations of regularly eating fruits and vegetables.
Food safety.
For food safety, the CDC recommends proper fruit handling and preparation to reduce the risk of food contamination and foodborne illness. Fresh fruits and vegetables should be carefully selected; at the store, they should not be damaged or bruised; and precut pieces should be refrigerated or surrounded by ice.
All fruits and vegetables should be rinsed before eating. This recommendation also applies to produce with rinds or skins that are not eaten. It should be done just before preparing or eating to avoid premature spoilage.
Fruits and vegetables should be kept separate from raw foods like meat, poultry, and seafood, as well as from utensils that have come in contact with raw foods. Fruits and vegetables that are not going to be cooked should be thrown away if they have touched raw meat, poultry, seafood, or eggs.
All cut, peeled, or cooked fruits and vegetables should be refrigerated within two hours. After a certain time, harmful bacteria may grow on them and increase the risk of foodborne illness.
Allergies.
Fruit allergies make up about 10 percent of all food related allergies.
Nonfood uses.
Because fruits have been such a major part of the human diet, various cultures have developed many different uses for fruits they do not depend on for food. For example:
Fruit flies.
Fruit flies are species of flies that lay their eggs in the flesh of fruit. The pupae then consume the fruit before maturing into adult flies. Some species lay eggs in fruit that is done maturing or rotten; however, some species select hosts that are not yet ripe. Thus, these fruit flies cause significant damage to fruit crops. An example of this type of fruit fly is the Queensland fruit fly ("Bactrocera tyroni") "B. tyroni" causes more than $28.5 million in damage to Australian fruit crops a year. Combating this pest without the use of harmful pesticides is an active area of research.

