
False cognates are pairs of words that seem to be cognates because of similar sounds and meaning, but have different etymologies; they can be within the same language or from different languages, even within the same family. For example, the English word "dog" and the Mbabaram word "dog" have exactly the same meaning and very similar pronunciations, but by complete coincidence. Likewise, English "much" and Spanish "mucho" came by their similar meanings via completely different Proto-Indo-European roots. This is different from false friends, which are similar-sounding words with different meanings, but which may in fact be etymologically related. 
Even though false cognates lack a common root, there may still be an indirect connection between them (for example by phono-semantic matching or folk etymology).
Phenomenon.
The term "false cognate" is sometimes misused to refer to false friends, but the two phenomena are distinct. False friends occur when two words in different languages or dialects look similar, but have different meanings. While some false friends are also false cognates, many are genuine cognates (see False friends § Causes). For example, English "pretend" and French "prétendre" are false friends, but not false cognates, as they have the same origin.
"Mama and papa" type.
The basic kinship terms mama and papa comprise a special case of false cognates.
Examples.
"Note: Some etymologies may be simplified to avoid overly long descriptions".
False cognates used in the coinage of new words.
The coincidental similarity between false cognates can sometimes be used in the creation of new words (neologization). For example, the Hebrew word "dal" ("poor") (which is a false cognate of the phono-semantically similar English word "dull") is used in the new Israeli Hebrew expression אין רגע דל "en rega dal" (literally "There is no poor moment") as a phono-semantic matching for the English expression "Never a dull moment".
Similarly, the Hebrew word דיבוב "dibúv" ("speech, inducing someone to speak"), which is a false cognate of (and thus etymologically unrelated to) the phono-semantically similar English word "dubbing", is then used in the Israeli phono-semantic matching for "dubbing". The result is that in today's Israel, דיבוב "dibúv" means "dubbing".

