
Western Sahara is a territory in Northern Africa, bordered by the North Atlantic Ocean, Morocco proper, Algeria (Tindouf region), and Mauritania. Geographic coordinates: 
Size.
"Total:" , about the size of Colorado
The peninsula in the extreme southwest, with the city of Lagouira, is called Ras Nouadhibou, Cabo Blanco, or Cap Blanc. The eastern side is part of Mauritania.
Maritime claims: contingent upon resolution of sovereignty issue
Land.
Terrain.
The terrain is mostly low, flat desert with large areas of rocky or sandy surfaces rising to small mountains in south and northeast.
Elevation extremes:
Natural resources.
Phosphates, iron ore, and fishing resources on Atlantic Ocean coast
Land use.
"Arable land:" 0.02%
Irrigated land: N/A
Natural hazards.
Hot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind can occur during winter and spring; widespread harmattan haze exists 60% of time, often severely restricting visibility. Flash flooding occurs during spring months.
Environment.
Climate.
Western Sahara has a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification "BWh"). Annual average rainfall is below everywhere. Along the Atlantic coast, averages high and low temperatures are constant and very moderated throughout the year because cool offshore ocean currents considerably cool off the climate, especially during the day. However, summertime is long and extremely hot and wintertime is short and very warm to truly hot further in the interior, where cooling marine influences aren't felt anymore. Average high temperatures exceed in summer during a prolonged period of time but can reach as high as or even more in places such as Smara, Tichla, Bir Gandus, Bir Anzarane, Aghouinite, Aousserd and others. Average high temperatures exceed in winter but average low temperatures can drop to in some places. The sky is usually clear and bright throughout the year and sunny weather is the norm.
Current issues.
Sparse water and lack of arable land.
Extreme points.
This is a list of the extreme points of Western Sahara, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

