
Glorantha is a fantasy world created by Greg Stafford. It was first introduced in the board game "White Bear and Red Moon" (1975) by Chaosium and then in a number of other board, roleplaying and computer games, including "RuneQuest" and "HeroQuest", as well as several works of fiction and the computer strategy game "King of Dragon Pass". The Gloranthan world is characterised by its complex use of mythology, heavily influenced by the universalist approaches of Joseph Campbell and Mircea Eliade, its sword and sorcery ethos, its long and distinctive history as a setting for role-playing games, its community development and expansion, and (unusual among early American fantasy role-playing games) its relative lack of Tolkienesque influence.
Stafford first wrote about in Glorantha in 1966 as a way to deepen his own understanding of mythology. He founded the company Chaosium to publish the board wargame "White Bear and Red Moon" in 1975, which was set in Glorantha. Chaosium later published other games in the setting, including the critically acclaimed "RuneQuest". Various later editions of "RuneQuest", the narrative role-playing game "HeroQuest" (the first edition of which was published as "Hero Wars"), and the video game "King of Dragon Pass" were also set in Glorantha, as were several prominent fan efforts. Stafford has also explored the Gloranthan setting in the fantasy novel "King of Sartar" and a number of unfinished works published under the collective name of "the Stafford Library".
In Glorantha, magic operates from the everyday level of prayers and charms to the creation and maintenance of the world. Heroes make their way in the world, and may also venture into metaphysical realms to gain knowledge and power, at the risk of body and soul. In the more recent material, competing magical outlooks (such as theism, shamanism and mysticism) exist to explain the world. Within each metaphysical system, adherents may also compete, such as when theistic worshipers of rival gods battle each other. The world is flat, with a dome-like sky, and it has been shaped in large and small ways by the mythic actions of the gods. The 'historical' world of Glorantha is in a more or less fallen state, having recovered only partially from a universal battle against Chaos in the mythic Godtime.
Humans are the dominant race, but other sentient beings abound. Some, such as the mystic dragonewts, are unique to Glorantha. Familiar nonhuman races, such as elves and dwarves, are distinct from their common, Tolkienesque portrayals.
History of the Gloranthan game world.
Origin and board games (1960s–70s).
Glorantha's origins lie in experiments with mythology, storytelling, recreation, and the blending of ancient societies. It is unlike its contemporary, "Dungeons &amp; Dragons" which has its roots in wargaming.
Stafford's first imaginings of Glorantha date back to 1966, when he began his studies at Beloit College, as a vehicle for him to deepen his own understanding of mythology by creating his own mythology. Stafford was greatly influenced by the ideas on the mythology of Joseph Campbell, and echoes of Campbell's work are to be found in many aspects of Glorantha; for instance, the story of the "God Learners" can be seen as an exercise on the implications of Campbell's idea of a unifying monomyth, and the story of Prince Argrath an exploration of Campbell's "The Hero with a Thousand Faces" (1949). More abstractly, Campbell's idea that myths are how we shape our lives deeply informs the picture of life in Glorantha throughout the game world's publication history.
The first game set in Glorantha was the board game "White Bear and Red Moon". The game details a time of constant war between the land of Sartar and the Lunar Empire during the reign of Argrath Dragontooth. Its board details an area called "Dragon Pass", while the rulebook provides details of the warring factions, their lands, and leaders. In addition, it provides a large scale map titled "The Greater Lunar Empire", that provides us with the first glimpse of the larger world in which Dragon Pass is placed. Although the game is set in Glorantha,"White Bear and Red Moon" does not mention the name of the world.
The next publication was also a board game, "Nomad Gods", published by Chaosium in 1978. "Nomad Gods" detailed the raids and wars between the beast-riding, spirit-worshiping tribes of Prax, a cursed land to the east of Dragon Pass. Like its predecessor, it does not mention the world by name.
In 1978, after the publication of "Nomad Gods", and prior to the publication of RuneQuest, the name Glorantha finally appears in print for the first time. Wyrm's Footnotes #4 contains three articles on Glorantha and a map of the whole world.
Role-playing games (late 1970s – 2000s).
The first edition of the role-playing game "RuneQuest" was released in 1978. Throughout the book, the world was referred to as "Glorontha". Several later editions were made; the second edition ("RuneQuest 2") in 1979 introduced many sophisticated game aids, such as "Cults of Prax" and "Cults of Terror", and highly polished campaign packs, such as "Griffin Mountain". Using materials such as "Cults of Prax", players aligned their characters with any of several distinct religions, grounding those characters in the political, cultural, and metaphysical conflicts of Glorantha. Each religion offered a distinct worldview and cultural outlook, none of which are objectively correct. This approach of offering competing mythical histories and value systems continues in current Glorantha material. "Cults of Terror" focused on the worship of evil gods and adversaries, such as Vivamort, a vampire cult, and Lunar and Chaos cults.
In 1993, Stafford published his first major expansion of Gloranthan mythology, the novel "King of Sartar". This was a departure from previous Gloranthan material, which had all been targeted at a tabletop role-playing game audience.
In an attempt to leverage the power of a much bigger gaming company, a third edition of "RuneQuest", was published with Avalon Hill in 1984. The default setting for this edition was the "Dark Ages of fantasy Europe", but it also included a booklet allowing use in Glorantha. Later supplements such as "Gods of Glorantha: 60 Religions for RuneQuest" expanded religious aspects, while "" did the same for culture and geography. 
In the mid 1990s, Avalon Hill began work on a fourth edition of RuneQuest, subtitled Adventures in Glorantha. Stafford did not approve of the project and it was canceled. "RuneQuest" did not prosper with its association with Avalon Hill, and the relationship between Chaosium, who held the rights to Glorantha, and Avalon Hill, who held the rights to "RuneQuest", finally broke down completely in 1995. After the break with Chaosium, Avalon Hill began to assert their trademark to the RuneQuest name, began work on . It was unrelated to Glorantha and the third edition rules. The project was canceled just before printing in 1998.
During this period of breakdown, Glorantha continued to evolve. The advent of the Internet caused a boom in fan creations for Glorantha. This was supported by several unofficial business ventures, such as Reaching Moon Megacorp, and a lively convention scene. Loren Miller proposed his Maximum Game Fun principle as a basis for gaming in Glorantha; this soon became a game system in its own right. David Dunham proposed his "PenDragon Pass" system, a nearly freeform game system, and several ambitious freeform games were played at conventions. One such game, "Home of the Bold", hosted up to eighty participants. 
The video game "King of Dragon Pass" was released by A Sharp in 1999. The player assumes the role of an Orlanthi hero who seeks to unite the clans and tribes of Dragon Pass into a single kingdom. The game features exceptional depth of coverage of the area of Dragon Pass, and featured the first compelling public view of Stafford's ideas about the hero's quest. Stafford was also self publishing additional material at this time about the history and mythology of Glorantha in non-game form in "The Glorious (Re)Ascent of Yelm".
Recent years (2000s–present).
In 2000, Issaries, Inc. published "Hero Wars", a new Gloranthan role-playing game unrelated to RuneQuest. Its next iteration in 2003 was named "HeroQuest" and later in 2008, Moon Design Publications published an updated second edition. 2016 saw Moon Design publish "HeroQuest Glorantha", completely integrating Glorantha into the rules. 2006 saw "RuneQuest" licensed from Issaries by Mongoose Publishing with a second edition in 2010. In 2012, The Design Mechanism published the sixth edition of RuneQuest, with no Gloranhan content. Glorantha returned in 2018 with Chaosium publishing "RuneQuest - Roleplaying in Glorantha".
Hero Wars &amp; HeroQuest.
The "HeroQuest" game system, written by Robin Laws in collaboration with Greg Stafford, is radically different from "RuneQuest" in that it emphasises narrativist aspects of role-playing; in contrast, "RuneQuest" emphasised simulationist aspects. Because of this change in approach some "RuneQuest" fans found it difficult to adjust to "HeroQuest". However, other long-term fans felt that the game fit Glorantha far better than "RuneQuest". A rewritten second edition was published in Spring 2009 by Moon Design Publications, and is being supported with comprehensive Gloranthan sourcebooks: "Sartar: Kingdom of Heroes" (2009), "Sartar Companion" (2010) and "Pavis: Gateway to Adventure" (2012). 
RuneQuest.
In 2006, "RuneQuest" was licensed to Mongoose Publishing by Issaries. Their new edition of the rules, were not set in Glorantha, and required a further supplemement, "Glorantha – The Second Age" to play. Written by Robin Laws, it was set in the Second Age of Gloratha's history against the backdrop of The God Learner empire and the Empire of Wyrm's Friend. In this edition, Mongoose produced 17 supplements and adventures based in Glorantha, alongside their generic fantasy background.
A second edition "Mongoose RuneQuest II" was published in January 2010, but Mongoose Publishing's licence for Gloranthan material lapsed in May 2011. The "RuneQuest II" game system has been retitled "Legend", and contains no Gloranthan material. A new company, The Design Mechanism, was formed by the authors of "RuneQuest II", and ownership of the Gloranthan supplements produced for the "RuneQuest II" line was transferred to them (PDF versions continued to be sold). There are close links between The Design Mechanism and Moon Design Publications, with The Design Mechanism founders writing material for both companies. Their new edition of the RuneQuest rules, "RuneQuest: Sixth Edition", did not have a Gloranthan setting.
In 2018 Chaosium published RuneQuest - Roleplaying in Glorantha. Wholly set in Glorantha, it advanced the in-game date to 1625, and focuses once again on Dragon Pass. Along with its two slipcase companions, it provides a complete overview of this region. Again the village of Apple Lane in the homeland of Sartar is used as a starting adventure setting, but updated to the year 1625. Two further supplements concentrate on specific areas within Dragon Pass.
The World of Glorantha.
There are a variety of cultures in Glorantha that have strikingly different perceptions of their world, the magic that pervades it and the major events that have shaped it.
The Glorantha website introduces Glorantha as follows:
Glorantha is an action-packed world of adventure. Gods and Goddesses struggle here, with nations of people nothing but their pawns. The stormy barbarians with their brutal but honest Storm God struggle against the Lunar Empire, led by the imperial Sun God and devious Moon Goddess.
Glorantha is an exciting world of heroes. Legends are being made by great individuals, many who are not even human beings. Some work with the deities, other heroes and heroines fight against them.
Glorantha is colorful and full of magic. Supernatural animals are found, ranging from unicorns to seven types of merfolk and the Goddess of Lions.
Glorantha is immense. If explored, it has different worlds and dimensions, whole realms where Gods, spirits and sorcerous powers come from. Unlike many fantasy settings, Glorantha emphasises religion, myth and belief to a level rarely seen in role-playing or fantasy fiction elsewhere.
Glorantha shares some fantasy tropes such as dwarves, elves, trolls, giants, but has developed them differently to the more conventional versions based on the work of Tolkien. Dwarves are literally made of stone and exist as manifest rigid inflexible laws of creation, while elves are intelligent, mobile plants. Glorantha is full of surprises.
Glorantha is as deep as you want it to be, or not. Hackers and choppers have what they want, while scholars and mythologists have a vast playground of new stories, legends and myths to enjoy.
The world of Glorantha has various cultures analogous to Earth spread over two major landmasses and a widespread archipelago. The northern continent of Genertela has a caste society of roughly Vedic type to the west, an autocratic Oriental society to the east and a classical style Bronze Age culture in the center. The southern continent of Pamaltela is somewhat like Africa, but with many differences.
Specifically Gloranthan creatures.
Broos are creatures of chaos. As a result of their ability to mate with anything, they have the body of a man and features of their animal parent, often deer, goats, antelope, cattle, and sheep. The animal parent normally dies with the child eating its way out of the host at full gestation. They worship Malia, the Mother of Disease, and Thed, the goddess of rape and mother of Chaos.
Scorpionmen are belligerent folk, who look like a sort of scorpion-human centaur. They are described as stupid, vicious and live in violent matriarchies with a religious emphasis on devouring. They are chaotic in nature.
Ducks or "Durulz" are large intelligent ducks with arms instead of wings (or men cursed with feathers and webbed feet, depending on your point of view). They reside around rivers, mainly in Sartar, and have an unexplained mystical affinity with Death.
Aldryami are Gloranthan plantmen, nature and sun worshipping—mainly worshipping Aldrya, deity of plants. Unlike Tolkienesque elves, they are alien, physically plant-like and often hostile to normal humans ("meat men'"). Like many other fictional elf races, they are excellent archers.
Mostali are a machine-like dwarf race, extremely xenophobic, orthodox and insular. Inventors of iron, which has many extraordinary magical properties in Glorantha, contrasting to the primary metal used bronze.
Uz, the trolls, are the race of darkness, large, intelligent, astoundingly omnivorous, with a very developed sonar-like sense ("darksense"). Their societies are matriarchal, and they worship, among others, a goddess of darkness called Kyger Litor, mother of the Trolls, and the more violent and sinister Zorak Zoran.
Dragonewts are a magical race who comprise several forms of neotenic dragons, engaged in a cycle of self-improving reincarnation. They are extremely alien with an incomprehensible mindset. They must have oral surgery in order to speak human languages.
Multimedia Glorantha.
Glorantha has been the background for a number of different media, and numerous pieces of myth and fiction created by the Glorantha community, featured in magazines such as "Tales of the Reaching Moon". Several hundred gaming miniatures by various licensees and about a dozen plush toys have also been produced at various times.
Magazines.
"Tales of the Reaching Moon"
plus several others

