
General Dynamics Electric Boat (GDEB) is a subsidiary of General Dynamics Corporation. It has been the primary builder of submarines for the United States Navy for more than 100 years. The company's main facilities are a shipyard in Groton, Connecticut, a hull-fabrication and outfitting facility in Quonset Point, Rhode Island, and a design and engineering facility in New London, Connecticut.
History.
The company was founded in 1899 by Isaac Rice as the Electric Boat Company to build John Philip Holland's submersible ship designs, which were developed at Lewis Nixon's Crescent Shipyard in Elizabeth, New Jersey. "Holland VI" was the first submarine that this shipyard built, which became when it was commissioned into the United States Navy on April 11, 1900—the first submarine to be officially commissioned. The success of "Holland VI" created a demand for follow-up models (A class or ) that began with the prototype submersible "Fulton" built at Electric Boat (EB). Some foreign navies were interested in John Holland's latest submarine designs, and so purchased the rights to build them under licensing contracts through EB; these included the United Kingdom's Royal Navy, the Imperial Japanese Navy, the Imperial Russian Navy, and the Royal Netherlands Navy.
From 1907 to 1925 EB designed submarines for the Navy and subcontracted their construction to the Fore River Shipyard in Quincy, Massachusetts and other shipyards. During this era, EB designed submarines of the B, C, D, E, K, L, M, N, AA-1, O, R, and S classes.
During the World War I era, the company and its subsidiaries (notably Elco) built 85 submarines via subcontractors and 722 submarine chasers for the US Navy, and 580 80-foot motor launches for the British Royal Navy.
Interwar.
After the war, the US Navy did not order another submarine from Electric Boat until in 1931. "Cuttlefish" was the first submarine built at EB's plant in Groton, Connecticut which has ever since been its primary submarine manufacturing facility. EB was the lead yard for several classes of submarines ("Perch", "Salmon", "Sargo", "Tambor", "Gar", "Mackerel" and "Gato") prior to World War II.
Starting in the early 1930s, EB was one of only two major US submarine manufacturers (the other being the Portsmouth Navy Yard) until the late 1950s. Three other yards (Manitowoc, Mare Island, and Cramp) produced submarines only during World War II. Several other yards including Mare Island built submarines in the late 1950s through the early 1970s. Since that time, only Electric Boat and Newport News have built submarines for the US Navy.
World War II.
During World War II, the company built 74 submarines, while Elco built nearly 400 PT boats, and Electric Boat ranked 77th among United States corporations in the value of World War II military production contracts.
Post war.
In 1952, Electric Boat was reorganized as General Dynamics Corporation under John Jay Hopkins. General Dynamics acquired Convair the following year, and the holding company assumed the "General Dynamics" name while the submarine-building operation reverted to the "Electric Boat" name.
Electric Boat built the first nuclear submarine which was launched in January 1954, and the first ballistic missile submarine in 1959. Submarines of the , , , and es were also constructed by Electric Boat. In 2002, EB conducted preservation work on "Nautilus", preparing her for her berth at the US Navy Submarine Force Library and Museum in Groton, Connecticut where she now resides as a museum. Electric Boat's first submarine "Holland" was scrapped in 1932.
From the mid-1970s to the present, EB has been one of only two submarine manufacturers in the United States with the other being Newport News Shipbuilding in Virginia.
Electric Boat overhauls and undertakes repair work on fast attack class boats. The company built the "Ohio"-class ballistic missile submarines and "Seawolf"-class submarines, as well as others. In April 2014, EB was awarded a $17.8 billion contract with Naval Sea Systems Command for ten Block IV "Virginia"-class attack submarines. It is the largest single shipbuilding contract in the service's history. The company builds the submarine along with Huntington Ingalls Industries Newport News Shipbuilding. The boats of Block IV "Virginia"s will cost less than Block III, as Electric Boat reduced the cost of the submarines by increasing efficiency in the construction process. The submarines of this type will build on the improvements to allow the boats to spend less time in the yard. In 2019 EB received a contract with Naval Sea Systems command to begin procuring materials for the Block V variant of the Virginia-Class. This upgrade brings the Virginia payload module, which enables Tomahawk missiles to be carried by the submarine.
1980s structural welding defect cover up.
In the early 1980s, structural welding defects had been covered up by falsified inspection records, and this led to significant delays and expenses in the delivery of several submarines being built at Electric Boat's shipyard. In some cases, the repairs resulted in practically dismantling and then rebuilding what had been a nearly completed submarine. The yard tried to pass the vast cost overruns directly on to the Navy, while Admiral Hyman G. Rickover demanded from Electric Boat's general manager P. Takis Veliotis that the yard make good on its "shoddy" workmanship.
The Navy eventually settled with General Dynamics in 1981, paying out $634 million of $843 million in "Los Angeles"-class submarines cost-overrun and reconstruction claims. As it happened, the Navy was also the yard's insurer, liable to compensate the company for losses and other mishaps. The concept of reimbursing General Dynamics under these conditions was initially considered "preposterous," in the words of Secretary of the Navy John Lehman, but the eventual legal basis of General Dynamics' reimbursement claims to the Navy for the company's poor workmanship included insurance compensation. Veliotis was subsequently indicted by a federal grand jury under racketeering and fraud charges in 1983 for demanding $1.3 million in kickbacks from a subcontractor. He escaped into exile and a life of luxury in his native Greece, where he remained a fugitive from U.S. justice.

