
Hexameter is a metrical line of verses consisting of six feet (a "foot" here is the pulse, or major accent, of words in an English line of poetry; in Greek and Latin a "foot" is not an accent, but describes various combinations of syllables). It was the standard epic metre in classical Greek and Latin literature, such as in the "Iliad", "Odyssey" and "Aeneid". Its use in other genres of composition include Horace's satires, Ovid's "Metamorphoses," and the Hymns of Orpheus. According to Greek mythology, hexameter was invented by Phemonoe, daughter of Apollo and the first Pythia of Delphi.
Classical Hexameter.
In classical hexameter, the six feet follow these rules:
A short syllable (υ) is a syllable with a short vowel and no consonant at the end. A long syllable (–) is a syllable that either has a long vowel, one or more consonants at the end (or a long consonant), or both. Spaces between words are not counted in syllabification, so for instance "cat" is a long syllable in isolation, but "cat attack" would be syllabified as short-short-long: "ca", "ta", "tack" (υ υ –).
Variations of the sequence from line to line, as well as the use of caesura (logical full stops within the line) are essential in avoiding what may otherwise be a monotonous sing-song effect.
Application.
Although the rules seem simple, it is hard to use classical hexameter in English, because English is a stress-timed language that condenses vowels and consonants between stressed syllables, while hexameter relies on the regular timing of the phonetic sounds. Languages having the latter properties (i.e., languages that are not stress-timed) include Ancient Greek, Latin, Lithuanian and Hungarian.
While the above classical hexameter has never enjoyed much popularity in English, where the standard metre is iambic pentameter, English poems have frequently been written in iambic hexameter. There are numerous examples from the 16th century and a few from the 17th; the most prominent of these is Michael Drayton's "Poly-Olbion" (1612) in couplets of iambic hexameter. An example from Drayton (marking the feet):
In the 17th century the iambic hexameter, also called alexandrine, was used as a substitution in the heroic couplet, and as one of the types of permissible lines in lyrical stanzas and the Pindaric odes of Cowley and Dryden.
Several attempts were made in the 19th century to naturalise the dactylic hexameter to English, by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Arthur Hugh Clough and others, none of them particularly successful. Gerard Manley Hopkins wrote many of his poems in six-foot iambic and sprung rhythm lines. In the 20th century a loose ballad-like six-foot line with a strong medial pause was used by William Butler Yeats. The iambic six-foot line has also been used occasionally, and an accentual six-foot line has been used by translators from the Latin and many poets.
In the late 18th century the hexameter was adapted to the Lithuanian language by Kristijonas Donelaitis. His poem ""Metai" (The Seasons)" is considered the most successful hexameter text in Lithuanian as yet.
Hungarian is extremely suitable to hexameter (and other forms of poetry based on quantitative metre). It has been applied to Hungarian since 1541, introduced by the grammarian János Sylvester. It can even occur spontaneously: A student may extricate oneself from failing to remember a poem by saying "I'm stuck here, unfortunately the rest won't come into my mind," which is a hexameter in Hungarian:
Sándor Weöres included an ordinary nameplate text ("Gyula Tóth tinsmith and plumber") in one of his poems (this time, a pentameter):
An inscription on a bar of chocolate went as follows ("milk chocolate with apricot and biscuit pieces"), another hexameter, noticed by the poet Dániel Varró:
Due to this feature, hexameter has been widely used both in translated (Greek and Roman) and in original Hungarian poetry up to the twentieth century (e.g. by Miklós Radnóti).

