
A honeymoon is a holiday taken by newlyweds immediately after their wedding, to celebrate their marriage. Today, honeymoons are often celebrated in destinations considered exotic or romantic.
History.
In Western culture and some westernized countries' cultures, the custom of a newlywed couple's going on a holiday together originated in early-19th-century Great Britain. Upper-class couples would take a "bridal tour", sometimes accompanied by friends or family, to visit relatives who had not been able to attend the wedding. The practice soon spread to the European continent and was known in France as a "voyage à la façon anglaise" (translation: English-style voyage), from the 1820s onwards.
Honeymoons in the modern sense—a pure holiday voyage undertaken by the couple—became widespread during the "Belle Époque", as one of the first instances of modern mass tourism. This came about despite initial disapproval by contemporary medical opinion (which worried about women's frail health) and by "savoir vivre" guidebooks (which referred to the public attention drawn to what was assumed to be the wife's sexual initiation). The most popular honeymoon destinations at the time were the French Riviera and Italy, particularly its seaside resorts and romantic cities such as Rome, Verona, and Venice. Typically honeymoons would start on the night of the marriage, with the couple leaving midway through the reception to catch a late train or ship. However, in the 21st century, many couples will not leave until 1–3 days after the ceremony and reception. In Jewish traditions, honeymoons are often put off seven days to allow for the seven nights of feasting if the visits to friends and family cannot be incorporated into the trip.
Etymology.
The honeymoon was originally the period following marriage, "characterized by love and happiness", as attested since 1546. The word may allude to "the idea that the first month of marriage is the sweetest".
According to a different version of the Oxford English Dictionary:
Today, "honeymoon" has a positive meaning, but originally it may have referred to the inevitable waning of love like a phase of the moon. In 1552, Richard Huloet wrote:
In many modern languages, the word for a honeymoon is a calque (e.g., ) or near-calque. Persian has a similar word, "mah-e-asal", which translates to "month of honey" or "moon of honey".
A fanciful 19th-century theory claimed that the word alludes to "the custom of the higher order of the Teutones... to drink Mead, or Metheglin, a beverage made with "honey", for thirty days after every wedding", but the theory is now rejected.
Effects.
One 2015 scholarly study concluded that going on a honeymoon is associated with a somewhat lower risk of divorce, regardless of how much or little is spent on the honeymoon itself. However, high spending and incurring significant debt on other wedding-related expenses, such as engagement rings and wedding ceremonies, is associated with a high risk of divorce.
Solomoon or unimoon.
An emerging 21st-century travel trend is the "solomoon" or "unimoon", a separate, solo holiday the newlyweds take without their spouse. "The New Zealand Herald" cites a report by "The New York Times" that such alternatives to honeymoons are "particularly suited for couples who just cannot agree on where to go". (This trend contrasts with the use by a jilted bride or groom of the travel reservations intended for the honeymoon, as popularly depicted in such films as "" (2008), in which Carrie Bradshaw turns her ruined Mexican honeymoon into a girls' trip, and "Like Father" (2018), in which a bride left at the altar travels with her absentee father on the cruise meant for her honeymoon.)

