
Ilona Staller (born 26 November 1951), widely known by her stage name Cicciolina ("little cuddly one"), is a Hungarian-Italian former porn star, politician, and singer.
Early life.
Ilona was born in Budapest, Hungary. Her father, László Staller, left the family when she was young. She was raised by her mother, who was a midwife, and her stepfather, who was an official in the Hungarian Ministry of the Interior.
In 1964, she began working as a model for the Hungarian news agency, M.T.I. In her memoirs and in a 1999 TV interview, she claimed that she had provided the Hungarian authorities with information on American diplomats staying at a Budapest luxury hotel where she worked as a maid in the 1960s. By the age of 25, and during her hotel work, she met an older Italian national named Salvatore Martini whom she later married.
Pornography and show business.
Naturalized by marriage and settled in Italy, Staller met pornographer Riccardo Schicchi in the early 1970s, and, beginning in 1973, achieved fame with a radio show called "Voulez-vous coucher avec moi?" on Radio Luna. For that program she adopted the name "Cicciolina". She referred to her male fanbase, and later the male members of the Italian parliament, as "cicciolini", translating loosely as "little tubby boys". Although she appeared in several films from 1970, she made her debut under her own name in 1975 with "La liceale" (also known as "The Teasers") by playing with Gloria Guida as her lesbian classmate.
In 1978, on the RAI show "C'era due Volte", her breasts were the first to be bared live on Italian TV. Staller appeared in her first hardcore pornographic film, "Telefono rosso" ("Red Telephone") in 1983. She produced the film together with Schicchi's company Diva Futura. Her memoirs were published as "Confessioni erotiche di Cicciolina" ("Erotic confessions of Cicciolina") by Olympia Press of Milan in 1987. That same year she appeared in "", titled "The Rise and Fall of the Roman Empress" in the United States, co-starring John Holmes. The film was later to create a furor when it was revealed that Holmes had tested positive for HIV prior to appearing in it. Staller has appeared nude in "Playboy"s editions in several countries. Her first "Playboy" appearance was in Argentina in March 1988. Other appearances for the magazine were in the U.S. (September 1990), Hungary (June 2005), Serbia (July 2005) and Mexico (September 2005).
In 1996, she appeared in the film "Replikator" and, in 1996, she had a role in the Brazilian soap opera "" as Princess Ludovica di Castelgandolfo di Genova. In 2008, she was a contestant on the Argentine version of "Strictly Come Dancing" named "Bailando por un Sueño".
Political life.
In 1979, Staller was presented as a candidate to the Italian parliament by the Lista del Sole, Italy's first Green party. In 1985, she switched to the Partito Radicale, campaigning on a libertarian platform against nuclear energy and NATO membership, as well as for human rights. She was elected to the Italian parliament in 1987, with approximately 20,000 votes. While in office, and before the outset of the Gulf War, she offered to have sex with Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein in return for peace in the region. She was not re-elected at the end of her term in 1991.
In 1991, Staller was among the founders of another Italian political movement, called Partito dell'Amore ("Party of Love"), which was spearheaded by friend and fellow porn star Moana Pozzi. In January 2002, she began exploring the possibility of campaigning in Hungary, her country of birth, to represent Budapest's industrial Kőbánya district in the Hungarian parliament. However, she failed to collect enough petition signatures for a non-partisan candidacy. In the same year, she ran in local elections in Monza, Italy, promising to convert a prominent building into a gambling casino, but she attracted few votes. In 2004, she announced plans to run for mayor of Milan with a similar promise. She renewed her offer to have sex with Saddam Hussein in October 2002, when Iraq was resisting international pressure to allow inspections for weapons of mass destruction, and in April 2006, she made the same offer to Osama bin Laden.
In September 2011, it was revealed that Staller was eligible for and would be receiving a yearly pension of 39,000 euros from the Italian state as a result of her five years in the country's parliament. Reacting to the controversy raised by the news, the former porn star, who started receiving the pension in November 2011, when she turned 60, stated: "I earned it and I'm proud of it."
In 2012, Staller founded the Democracy, Nature and Love Party (DNA). Its objectives included the legalization of same-sex marriage, the reopening of former brothels ("closed houses"), a guaranteed minimum wage for young people, improvements to the judiciary, and the elimination of the privileges of the rich political "caste".
She was also a candidate – on a proposal by blogger Luca Bagatin – in administrative elections in Rome on 26 and 27 May 2013, on the list 'Republicans and Liberals'.
In popular culture.
In 1980, an erotic comics series, "La Cicciolina", was made by Giovanni Romanini and Lucio Filippucci, based on the actress.
British band Pop Will Eat Itself released a song called "Touched by the Hand of Cicciolina" as an unofficial World Cup single in July 1990. The song reached number 28 in the UK singles charts. Also, an industrial 1990s band, Machines of Loving Grace, paid a tribute to Cicciolina on their first, self-titled album and named a song after her.
Brazilian musician Fausto Fawcett also wrote a song in tribute to Cicciolina, titled "Cicciolina (O Cio Eterno)", present in his 1989 album "Império dos Sentidos".
Finnish singer Erika Vikman released the song "Cicciolina" on 26 January 2020. It was selected as one of six entries that competed to represent Finland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2020. The song finished in 2nd place in the national selection.
In the 2020 TV series Veneno, she was portrayed attending to a party in Gran Canaria in 1996, where she met Spanish personality La Veneno.
Musical career.
Staller has recorded several songs, mostly from live performances, with explicit lyrics being sung to a children's melody. Her most famous song is "", a song entirely dedicated to "il cazzo", which means "the dick" in Italian. Because of its extensive use of profanity, the song could not be released in Italy, but became a hit in other countries, especially in France. The song gained considerable popularity in the internet era, when many Italian speakers were able to hear it for the first time.
Several unreleased songs were recorded during her RCA period and the Diva Futura agency period. Some of these unreleased songs were subsequently used during her TV shows, live performances or as soundtracks in her porn movies.
Personal life.
She was the muse of American artist Jeff Koons, who persuaded her to collaborate on a series of sculptures and photographs of them having sex in many positions, settings and costumes, which were exhibited under the title "Made in Heaven" and made waves at the 1990 Venice Biennale. Staller married Koons in 1991. In 1992 they had a son, Ludwig, but separated the following year, partly because Staller refused to stop making porn. Their marriage ended in 1994. In violation of a US court order, Staller left the US for Italy, taking their then-two-year-old son, Ludwig. In 2008, Staller filed suit against Koons for failing to pay child support.

