
John D. Carmack II (born August 20, 1970) is an American computer programmer, video game developer and engineer. He co-founded the video game company id Software and was the lead programmer of its games "Commander Keen", "Wolfenstein 3D", "Doom", "Quake", and their sequels. Carmack made innovations in 3D computer graphics, such as his Carmack's Reverse algorithm for shadow volumes. In 2013, he resigned from id to work full-time at Oculus VR, where he served as CTO and later Consulting CTO in 2019.
Biography.
Early life.
Carmack was born in Shawnee Mission, Kansas, the son of local television news reporter Stan Carmack. He grew up in the Kansas City metropolitan area, where he became interested in computers at an early age. He attended Shawnee Mission East High School in Prairie Village, Kansas and Raytown South High School in nearby Raytown, Missouri.
Carmack was introduced to video games with the 1978 shoot 'em up title "Space Invaders" in the arcades during a summer vacation as a child. The 1980 maze chase arcade game "Pac-Man" also left a strong impression on him. He cited Shigeru Miyamoto as the game developer he most admired.
As reported in David Kushner's "Masters of Doom", when Carmack was 14, he broke into a school to help a group of children steal Apple II computers. To gain entry to the building, Carmack concocted a sticky substance of thermite mixed with Vaseline that melted through the windows. However, an overweight accomplice struggled to get through the hole and instead opened the window, setting off a silent alarm and alerting police. Carmack was arrested, and sent for psychiatric evaluation (the report mentions "no empathy for other human beings" and describes Carmack as "a brain on legs"). Carmack was then sentenced to a year in a juvenile home.
He attended the University of Missouri–Kansas City for two semesters before withdrawing to work as a freelance programmer.
Career.
Softdisk, a computer company in Shreveport, Louisiana, hired Carmack to work on "Softdisk G-S" (an Apple II publication), introducing him to John Romero and other future key members of id Software such as Adrian Carmack (not related). Later, Softdisk would place this team in charge of a new, but short-lived, bi-monthly game subscription product called "Gamer's Edge" for the IBM PC (DOS) platform. In 1990, while still at Softdisk, Carmack, Romero, and others created the first of the "Commander Keen" games, a series that was published by Apogee Software, under the shareware distribution model, from 1991 onwards. Afterwards, Carmack left Softdisk to co-found id Software.
Carmack has pioneered or popularized the use of many techniques in computer graphics, including "adaptive tile refresh" for "Commander Keen", ray casting for "Hovertank 3-D", "Catacomb 3-D", and "Wolfenstein 3-D", binary space partitioning which "Doom" became the first game to use, surface caching which he invented for "Quake", Carmack's Reverse (formally known as z-fail stencil shadows) which he devised for "Doom 3", and MegaTexture technology, first used in "".
Carmack's engines have also been licensed for use in other influential first-person shooters such as "Half-Life", "Call of Duty" and "Medal of Honor". In 2007, when Carmack was on vacation with his wife, he ended up playing some games on his cellphone, and decided he was going to make a "good" mobile game.
On August 7, 2013, Carmack joined Oculus VR as their CTO. On November 22, 2013, he resigned from id Software to work full-time at Oculus VR. Carmack's reason for leaving was because id's parent company ZeniMax Media didn't want to support Oculus Rift. Carmack's role at both companies later became central to a ZeniMax lawsuit against Oculus' parent company, Facebook, claiming that Oculus stole ZeniMax's virtual reality intellectual property. The trial jury absolved Carmack of liability, though Oculus and other corporate officers were held liable for trademark, copyright, and contract violations.
In February 2017, Carmack sued ZeniMax, claiming the company had refused to pay him the remaining $22.5 million owed him from their purchase of id Software. By October 2018, Carmack stated that he and ZeniMax reached an agreement and that "Zenimax has fully satisfied their obligations to me", ending the suit.
On November 13, 2019, Carmack announced that he was stepping down from the Oculus CTO role to become a "Consulting CTO" in order to allocate more time to his work on artificial general intelligence (AGI).
Armadillo Aerospace.
Around 2000, Carmack became interested in rocketry, a hobby of his youth. Reviewing how much money he was spending on customizing Ferraris, Carmack realized he could do significant work in hobby aerospace. He began by giving financial support to a few local amateur engineers. Carmack funded the company out of his own pocket, for "something north of a million dollars a year." The company of hobbyists made steady progress toward their goals of suborbital space flight and eventual orbital vehicles. In October 2008, Armadillo Aerospace competed in a NASA contest known as the Lunar Lander Challenge, winning first place in the Level 1 competition along with $350,000. In September 2009, they completed Level 2 and were awarded $500,000. The company went into "hibernation mode" in 2013.
Open-source software.
Carmack is a well-known advocate of open-source software, and has repeatedly voiced his opposition to software patents, equating them to robbery. He has also contributed to open-source projects, such as starting the initial port of the X Window System to Mac OS X Server and working to improve the OpenGL drivers for Linux through the Utah GLX project.
Carmack released the source code for "Wolfenstein 3D" in 1995 and the "Doom" source code in 1997. When the source code to "Quake" was leaked and circulated among the "Quake" community underground in 1996, a programmer unaffiliated with id Software used it to port "Quake" to Linux, and subsequently sent the patches to Carmack. Instead of pursuing legal action, id Software, at Carmack's behest, used the patches as the foundation for a company-sanctioned Linux port. id Software has since publicly released the source code to "Quake", "Quake 2", "Quake 3" and lastly "Doom 3" (and later the "BFG Edition"), all under the GNU General Public License (GPL). The "Doom" source code was also re-released under the GPL in 1999. The id Tech 4 engine, more commonly known as the "Doom 3 engine", has also been released as open-source license under the GPL. The source code for "Hovertank 3D" and "Catacomb 3D" (as well as Carmack's earlier "Catacomb") was released in June 2014 by Flat Rock Software with Carmack's blessing. On the other hand, Carmack has several times over the years voiced a skeptical opinion about Linux as a gaming platform; for instance in 2013 he argued for emulation "as proper technical direction for gaming on linux" and in 2014 he voiced the opinion that Linux might be the biggest problem for the success of the Steam Machine.
Carmack contributes to charities and gaming communities. Some of the recipients of Carmack's charitable contributions include his former high school, promoters of open-source software, opponents of software patents, and game enthusiasts.
Personal life.
Carmack was so successful at id that by mid-1994 he had purchased 2 Ferraris: a 328 and a Ferrari Testarossa. In 1997, he gave away one of his Ferraris (a 328 model) as a prize to Dennis Fong, the winner of the "Quake" tournament "Red Annihilation".
He met his wife, Katherine Anna Kang, at the 1997 QuakeCon when she visited id's offices. As a bet, Kang challenged Carmack to sponsor the first All Female Quake Tournament if she was able to produce a significant number of participants. Carmack predicted a maximum of 25 participants, but there were 1,500. Carmack and Kang married on January 1, 2000, and planned a ceremony in Hawaii. Steve Jobs requested that they would postpone the ceremony so he could attend the MacWorld Expo on January 5, 2000. Carmack declined and suggested making a video instead. Carmack and his wife had a son in 2004. Carmack has a blog last updated in 2006 (previously a .plan), an active Twitter account, and also occasionally posts comments to Slashdot.
As a game developer, Carmack differed from many of his contemporaries by avoiding commitment to a final release date for any game he was developing. Instead, when asked for a release date on a new title, Carmack would usually reply that the game would be released "when it's done.". In 2019, as a guest on the Joe Rogan podcast, Carmack stated that his beliefs have changed over time: "I largely recant from that now." On Rage's 6-year development time he says: "I think we should have done whatever it would have taken to ship it 2 years earlier". Carmack also reflects on the internal development of Quake in this regard and describes it as "traumatic" and says id Software could have split the game into two parts and shipped it earlier.
Employees at Apogee, in their past years the publishers of games by id Software, adopted this business practice as well.
Carmack supported the 2012 presidential campaign of Libertarian Ron Paul.
Carmack is an atheist.
During his time at id Software, a medium pepperoni pizza would arrive for Carmack from Domino's Pizza almost every day, carried by the same delivery person for more than 15 years. Carmack had been such a regular customer that they continued to charge him 1995 prices.
On occasion he has commended the efforts of similarly focused programmers – first Ken Silverman, who wrote the Build engine for 3D Realms, and later with Tim Sweeney of Epic Games, who wrote the Unreal Engine.

