
Richard Kim Milford (February 7, 1951 – June 16, 1988), known professionally as Kim Milford, was an American actor, singer-songwriter, and composer. He was known for his stage acting in musicals such as "The Rocky Horror Show" and "Jesus Christ Superstar".
Early years.
Born in Glen Ridge, New Jersey, Milford grew up in Winnetka, Illinois. His older sister, Penelope, also became an actress. Milford attended New Trier High School.
Career.
Acting.
Milford first appeared at the stock theatre in Chicago at age 10. In 1971, he appeared at The Kennedy Center in Leonard Bernstein’s "Mass". Age 17, he was in the original stage version of "Hair" on Broadway, playing Woof and Claude. In 1976, he was awarded the Faith and Freedom Award by the Religious Heritage of America for his portrayal of the Prodigal Son in "Round Trip". Milford later performed in the first concert tour of "Jesus Christ Superstar" playing Jesus and Judas. He also appeared in the original American production of "The Rocky Horror Show" as Rocky with the Los Angeles Roxy Cast and in the Broadway production. He reprised his role in the 1980 North American Tour production. He also appeared in the plays "Henry Sweet Henry" (1967), "Your Own Thing", "Rockabye Hamlet" (1975–76), "More Than You Deserve", "Sunset", and "All Bets Off".
In addition to stage work, Milford appeared in the 1975 television movies "Song of the Succubus" and "Rock-a-Die-Baby" (also known as "Night of the Full Moon") in which he performed music with his band Moon. During the 1970s and 1980s, he had guest roles on "The Mod Squad" and "Mannix" and "The Highwayman", and starred in the 1978 feature films "Laserblast" and "Corvette Summer". He also had a recurring role as Tommy on the soap opera "The Secret Storm".
Music.
Milford briefly became vocalist for Beck, Bogert &amp; Appice, billed as The Jeff Beck Group, for six performances between July 24 to August 8, 1972. He was also the front man for his own band Moon who were co-writers on songs such as "Lovin' Lady", "Jo Anna" and "She's Puttin' Me Through Changes". According to an interview in "Viva", Milford recorded an album "Chain Your Lovers to the Bedposts" and a single "Help Is on the Way, Rozea" released in 1974. He recorded the single "Muddy River Water" for (Decca Records), the "Sunset" soundtrack and appeared on the Roxy cast album of "Rocky Horror Show".
Milford composed the music for "Salome", based on the Oscar Wilde play and starred in it at Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles in 1979. He wrote and performed "My Love Is a Rebel" on the soundtrack of "Limbo", starring Barry Bostwick. His song "Justice" appeared on the "Ciao! Manhattan" soundtrack.
Death.
On June 16, 1988, Milford died of heart failure following open heart surgery several weeks earlier. He was 37 years old.
Discography.
Albums.
Rocky Horror Show

