
Luxembourgish ( ; also "Luxemburgish", "Luxembourgian", "Letzebu(e)rgesch"; Luxembourgish: ) is a West Germanic language that is spoken mainly in Luxembourg. About 600,000 people speak Luxembourgish worldwide.
As a standard form of the Moselle Franconian language, Luxembourgish has similarities with other varieties of High German and the wider group of West Germanic languages. The status of Luxembourgish as an official language in Luxembourg, and the existence there of a regulatory body, have removed Luxembourgish, at least in part, from the domain of Standard German, its traditional .
Language family.
Luxembourgish belongs to the West Central German group of High German languages and is the primary example of a Moselle Franconian language.
Usage.
Luxembourgish is the national language of Luxembourg and one of its three administrative languages, alongside German and French.
In Luxembourg, 50.9% of citizens can speak Luxembourgish. Luxembourgish is also spoken in the Arelerland region of Belgium (part of the Province of Luxembourg) and in small parts of Lorraine in France.
In the German Eifel and Hunsrück regions, similar local Moselle Franconian dialects of German are spoken. The language is also spoken by a few descendants of Luxembourg immigrants in the United States and Canada.
Other Moselle Franconian dialects are spoken by ethnic Germans long settled in Transylvania, Romania (Siebenbürgen).
Moselle Franconian dialects outside the Luxembourg state border tend to have far fewer French loan words, and these mostly remain from the French Revolution.
Varieties.
There are several distinct dialect forms of Luxembourgish including Areler (from Arlon), Eechternoacher (Echternach), Kliärrwer (Clervaux), Miseler (Moselle), Stater (Luxembourg), Veiner (Vianden), Minetter (Southern Luxembourg) and Weelzer (Wiltz). Further small vocabulary differences may be seen even between small villages.
Increasing mobility of the population and the dissemination of the language through mass media such as radio and television are leading to a gradual standardisation towards a "Standard Luxembourgish" through the process of koineization.
Surrounding languages.
There is no distinct geographic boundary between the use of Luxembourgish and the use of other closely related High German dialects (for example, Lorraine Franconian); it instead forms a dialect continuum of gradual change.
Spoken Luxembourgish is relatively hard to understand for speakers of German who are generally not familiar with Moselle Franconian dialects (or at least other West Central German dialects). However, they can usually read the language to some degree. For those Germans familiar with Moselle Franconian dialects, it is relatively easy to understand and speak Luxembourgish as far as the everyday vocabulary is concerned. However, the large number of French loanwords in Luxembourgish may hamper communication about certain topics, or with certain speakers (who use many French loanwords).
Erna Hennicot-Schoepges, President of the Christian Social People's Party of Luxembourg 1995–2003, was active in promoting the language beyond Luxembourg's borders.
Written Luxembourgish.
Standardisation.
A number of proposals for standardising the orthography of Luxembourgish can be documented, going back to the middle of the 19th century. There was no officially recognised system, however, until the adoption of the "OLO" ("ofizjel lezebuurjer ortografi") on 5 June 1946. This orthography provided a system for speakers of all varieties of Luxembourgish to transcribe words the way they pronounced them, rather than imposing a single, standard spelling for the words of the language. The rules explicitly rejected certain elements of German orthography (e.g., the use of "ä" and "ö", the capitalisation of nouns). Similarly, new principles were adopted for the spelling of French loanwords.
This proposed orthography, so different from existing "foreign" standards that people were already familiar with, did not enjoy widespread approval.
A more successful standard eventually emerged from the work of the committee of specialists charged with the task of creating the "Luxemburger Wörterbuch", published in 5 volumes between 1950 and 1977. The orthographic conventions adopted in this decades-long project, set out in Bruch (1955), provided the basis of the standard orthography that became official on 10 October 1975. Modifications to this standard were proposed by the "Permanent Council of the Luxembourguish language" and adopted officially in the spelling reform of 30 July 1999. A detailed explanation of current practice for Luxembourgish can be found in Schanen &amp; Lulling (2003).
Alphabet.
The Luxembourgish alphabet consists of the 26 Latin letters plus three letters with diacritics: "é", "ä", and "ë". In loanwords from French and Standard German, other diacritics are usually preserved:
In German loanwords, the digraphs and indicate the diphthong , which does not appear in native words.
Eifeler Regel.
Like many other varieties of Western High German, Luxembourgish has a rule of final "n"-deletion in certain contexts. The effects of this rule (known as the "Eifel Rule") are indicated in writing, and therefore must be taken into account when spelling words and morphemes ending in or . For example:
Phonology.
Consonants.
The consonant inventory of Luxembourgish is quite similar to that of Standard German.
Grammar.
Nominal syntax.
Luxembourgish has three genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter), and three cases (nominative, accusative, and dative). These are marked morphologically on determiners and pronouns. As in German, there is no morphological gender distinction in the plural.
The forms of the articles and of some selected determiners are given below:
As seen above, Luxembourgish has plural forms of "en" ("a, an"), namely "eng" in the nominative/accusative and "engen" in the dative. They are not used as indefinite articles, which—as in German and English—do not exist in the plural, but they do occur in the compound pronouns "wéi en" ("what, which") and "sou en" ("such"). For example: "wéi eng Saachen" ("what things"); "sou eng Saachen" ("such things"). Moreover, they are used before numbers to express an estimation: "eng 30.000 Spectateuren" ("some 30,000 spectators").
Distinct nominative forms survive in a few nominal phrases such as "der Däiwel" ("the devil") and "eiser Herrgott" ("our Lord"). Rare examples of the genitive are also found: "Enn des Mounts" ("end of the month"), "Ufanks der Woch" ("at the beginning of the week"). The functions of the genitive are normally expressed using a combination of the dative and a possessive determiner: e.g. "dem Mann säi Buch" (lit. "to the man his book", i.e. "the man's book"). This is known as a periphrastic genitive, and is a phenomenon also commonly seen in dialectal and colloquial German, and in Dutch.
The forms of the personal pronouns are given in the following table (unstressed forms appear in parentheses):
The 2pl form is also used as a polite singular (like French "vous", see T-V distinction); the forms are capitalised in writing:
Like most varieties of colloquial German, but even more invariably, Luxembourgish uses definite articles with personal names. They are obligatory and not to be translated:
A feature Luxembourgish shares with only some western dialects of German is that women and girls are most often referred to with forms of the "neuter" pronoun "hatt":
Adjectives.
Luxembourgish morphology distinguishes two types of adjective: attributive and predicative. Predicative adjectives appear with verbs like "sinn" ("to be"), and receive no extra ending:
Attributive adjectives are placed before the noun they describe, and change their ending according to the grammatical gender, number, and case:
Curiously, the definite article changes with the use of an attributive adjective: feminine "d'" goes to "déi" (or "di"), neuter "d'" goes to "dat", and plural "d'" changes to "déi".
The comparative in Luxembourgish is formed analytically, i.e. the adjective itself is not altered (compare the use of -"er" in German and English; "tall" → "taller", "klein" → "kleiner"). Instead it is formed using the adverb "méi": e.g. "schéin" → "méi schéin"
The superlative involves a synthetic form consisting of the adjective and the suffix "-st": e.g. "schéin" → "schéinst " (compare German "schönst", English "prettiest"). Attributive modification requires the emphatic definite article and the inflected superlative adjective:
Predicative modification uses either the same adjectival structure or the adverbial structure "am"+ -"sten": e.g. "schéin" → "am schéinsten":
Some common adjectives have exceptional comparative and superlative forms:
Several other adjectives also have comparative forms. However, these are not commonly used as normal comparatives, but in special senses:
Word order.
Luxembourgish exhibits "verb second" word order in clauses. More specifically, Luxembourgish is a V2-SOV language, like German and Dutch. In other words, we find the following finite clausal structures:
Non-finite verbs (infinitives and participles) generally appear in final position:
These rules interact so that in subordinate clauses, the finite verb and any non-finite verbs must all cluster at the end. Luxembourgish allows different word orders in these cases:
This is also the case when two non-finite verb forms occur together:
Luxembourgish (like Dutch and German) allows prepositional phrases to appear after the verb cluster in subordinate clauses:
Vocabulary.
Luxembourgish has borrowed many French words. For example, the word for a bus driver is "Buschauffeur" (as in Dutch and Swiss German), which would be "Busfahrer" in German and "chauffeur de bus" in French.
Some words are different from Standard German, but have equivalents in German dialects. An example is "Gromperen" (potatoes – German: "Kartoffeln"). Other words are exclusive to Luxembourgish.
Selected common phrases.
"Note: Words spoken in sound clip do not reflect all words on this list."
Neologisms.
Neologisms in Luxembourgish include both entirely new words, and the attachment of new meanings to old words in everyday speech. The most recent neologisms come from the English language in the fields of telecommunications, computer science, and the Internet.
Recent neologisms in Luxembourgish include:
Academic projects.
Between 2000 and 2002, Luxembourgish linguist Jérôme Lulling compiled a lexical database of 125,000-word forms as the basis for the first Luxembourgish spellchecker (Projet C.ORT.IN.A).
The LaF ("Lëtzebuergesch als Friemsprooch" – Luxembourgish as a Foreign Language) is a set of four language proficiency certifications for Luxembourgish and follows the ALTE framework of language examination standards. The tests are administered by the Institut National des Langues Luxembourg.
The "Centre for Luxembourg Studies" at the University of Sheffield was founded in 1995 on the initiative of Professor Gerald Newton. It is supported by the government of Luxembourg which funds an endowed chair in Luxembourg Studies at the university.
The first class of students to study the language outside of the country as undergraduate students began their studies at the 'Centre for Luxembourg Studies' at Sheffield in the academic year 2011–2012.
Further reading.
In English
In French
In Luxembourgish
In German

