
A peninsula ( from "paene" "almost" and "insula" "island") is a piece of land that is bordered mostly by water but connected to mainland. The surrounding water is usually understood to be continuous, though not necessarily named as such. A peninsula can also be a headland, cape, island promontory, bill, point,
or spit. A point is generally considered a tapering piece of land projecting into a body of water that is less prominent than a cape. In English, the plural of peninsula is "peninsulas" or, less commonly, "peninsulae". A river which courses through a very tight meander is also sometimes said to form a "peninsula" within the (almost closed) loop of water.
Presented below is a list of peninsulas.
Africa.
Somali peninsula.
The Horn of Africa is a peninsula in Northeast Africa that juts into the Guardafui Channel, and is the easternmost projection of the African continent. It denotes the region containing the countries of Somalia, Eritrea, Djibouti and Ethiopia.
Asia.
Indian subcontinent and South Asia.
The Indian subcontinent is a peninsula, the only land feature in the world widely recognized as a subcontinent in the English language.
Korea.
The whole land mass encompassing North and South Korea is a peninsula, surrounded by the Sea of Japan on the east, the East China Sea to the south, and the Yellow Sea to the west, with the Korea Strait connecting the first two bodies of water.
Europe.
Europe is sometimes considered to be a large peninsula extending off Eurasia. As such, it is one of the largest peninsulas in the world and the only one to have the status as a full continent, largely as a matter of convention rather than science. It is composed of many smaller peninsulas, the four main and largest component peninsulas being the Scandinavian, Iberian, Balkan and Italian peninsulas.
Balkan Peninsula.
The Balkans is a peninsula including Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Kosovo, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and the European part of Turkey.
Iberian Peninsula.
Encompassing continental Spain and Portugal, Andorra, British overseas territory of Gibraltar and a small amount of southern France.
Scandinavia.
Scandinavia is a region in Northern Europe, with strong historical, cultural, and linguistic ties. The term Scandinavia in local usage covers the three kingdoms of Denmark, located on the Jutland Peninsula, and Norway and Sweden, located the on the Scandinavian Peninsula. In English usage, Scandinavia also sometimes refers to the Scandinavian Peninsula, or to the broader region including Finland and Iceland, which is always known locally as the Nordic countries.
The Scandinavian Peninsula, along with the islands, encompasses present-day Sweden, Norway, and the northwestern area of Finland.
Fennoscandia or the Fennoscandian Peninsula is the geographical peninsula comprising the Scandinavian Peninsula, Finland, Karelia, and the Kola Peninsula (Russia).
North America.
United States.
Florida.
Florida is a well-known example of a large peninsula, with its land area divided between the larger Florida peninsula and the smaller Florida panhandle on the north and west. It has several smaller peninsulas within it:
Michigan.
Michigan – the only bi-peninsular state – is very distinguishable for its mitten-shaped Lower Peninsula of Michigan which includes:
The rifle-shaped Upper Peninsula of Michigan contains: 
South America.
Southern Cone.
The Southern Cone, like Europe, is sometimes considered to be a large peninsula. Geographically, the peninsula encompasses most of Chile, Argentina, Uruguay and Southern Brazil and the southernmost portion of Paraguay, which makes it one of the largest peninsulas in the world. Like the Indian Peninsula, the Southern Cone is sometimes considered to be a subcontinent.

