
In arithmetic and number theory, the least common multiple, lowest common multiple, or smallest common multiple of two integers "a" and "b", usually denoted by lcm("a", "b"), is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both "a" and "b". Since division of integers by zero is undefined, this definition has meaning only if "a" and "b" are both different from zero. However, some authors define lcm("a",0) as 0 for all "a", which is the result of taking the lcm to be the least upper bound in the lattice of divisibility.
The lcm is the "lowest common denominator" (lcd) that can be used before fractions can be added, subtracted or compared. The lcm of more than two integers is also well-defined: it is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by each of them.
Overview.
A multiple of a number is the product of that number and an integer. For example, 10 is a multiple of 5 because 5 × 2 = 10, so 10 is divisible by 5 and 2. Because 10 is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both 5 and 2, it is the least common multiple of 5 and 2. By the same principle, 10 is the least common multiple of −5 and −2 as well.
Notation.
The least common multiple of two integers "a" and "b" is denoted as lcm("a", "b"). Some older textbooks use ["a", "b"], while the programming language J uses codice_1 .
Example.
Multiples of 4 are:
Multiples of 6 are:
"Common multiples" of 4 and 6 are the numbers that are in both lists:
Among this list, the smallest number is 12, hence the "least common multiple" is 12.
Applications.
When adding, subtracting, or comparing simple fractions, the least common multiple of the denominators (often called the lowest common denominator) is used, because each of the fractions can be expressed as a fraction with this denominator. For example,
where the denominator 42 was used, because it is the least common multiple of 21 and 6.
Gears problem.
Suppose there are two meshing gears in a machine, having "m" and "n" teeth, respectively, and the gears are marked by a line segment drawn from the center of the first gear to the center of the second gear. When the gears begin rotating, the number of rotations the first gear must complete to realign the line segment can be calculated by using formula_6. The first gear must complete formula_7 rotations for the realignment. By that time, the second gear will have made formula_8 rotations.
Planetary alignment.
Suppose there are three planets revolving around a star which take "l", "m" and "n" units of time, respectively, to complete their orbits. Assume that "l", "m" and "n" are integers. Assuming the planets started moving around the star after an initial linear alignment, all the planets attain a linear alignment again after formula_9 units of time. At this time, the first, second and third planet will have completed formula_10, formula_11 and formula_12 orbits, respectively, around the star.
Calculation.
Using the greatest common divisor.
The following formula reduces the problem of computing the least common multiple to the problem of computing the greatest common divisor (gcd), also known as the greatest common factor:
This formula is also valid when exactly one of "a" and "b" is 0, since gcd("a", 0) = |"a"|. However, if both "a" and "b" are 0, this formula would cause division by zero; lcm(0, 0) = 0 is a special case.
There are fast algorithms for computing the gcd that do not require the numbers to be factored, such as the Euclidean algorithm. To return to the example above,
Because gcd("a", "b") is a divisor of both "a" and "b", it is more efficient to compute the lcm by dividing "before" multiplying:
This identity is self-dual:
Other.
Then
where the absolute bars || denote the cardinality of a set.
In commutative rings.
The least common multiple can be defined generally over commutative rings as follows: Let "a" and "b" be elements of a commutative ring "R". A common multiple of "a" and "b" is an element "m" of "R" such that both "a" and "b" divide "m" (that is, there exist elements "x" and "y" of "R" such that "ax" = "m" and "by" = "m"). A least common multiple of "a" and "b" is a common multiple that is minimal, in the sense that for any other common multiple "n" of "a" and "b", "m" divides "n".
In general, two elements in a commutative ring can have no least common multiple or more than one. However, any two least common multiples of the same pair of elements are associates. In a unique factorization domain, any two elements have a least common multiple. In a principal ideal domain, the least common multiple of "a" and "b" can be characterised as a generator of the intersection of the ideals generated by "a" and "b" (the intersection of a collection of ideals is always an ideal).

