
Clarence LeRoy "Lee" Van Cleef Jr. (January 9, 1925 – December 16, 1989) was an American actor best known for his roles in Spaghetti Westerns such as "For a Few Dollars More" and "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly". He declined to have his nose altered to play a sympathetic character in his film debut, "High Noon", and was relegated to a non-speaking outlaw as a result. For a decade he was typecast as a minor villain, his "sinister" features overshadowing his acting skills. After suffering serious injuries in a car crash, Van Cleef had begun to lose interest in his declining career by the time Sergio Leone gave him a major role in "For a Few Dollars More". The film made him a box-office draw, especially in Europe.
Youth.
Van Cleef, born of partial Dutch, English and German ancestry on January 9, 1925, in Somerville, New Jersey, was the son of Marion Lavinia Van Fleet and Clarence LeRoy Van Cleef. At age 17, he obtained his high school diploma early in his senior year at Somerville High School in order to enlist in the United States Navy in September 1942.
Military service.
After basic training and further training at the Naval Fleet Sound School, Van Cleef was assigned to a submarine chaser and then to a minesweeper, , on which he worked as a sonarman.
The ship initially patrolled the Caribbean, then moved to the Mediterranean, participating in the landings in southern France. In January 1945, "Incredible" moved to the Black Sea, and performed sweeping duties out of the Soviet Navy base at Sevastopol, Crimea. Afterwards the ship performed air-sea rescue patrols in the Black Sea before returning to Palermo, Sicily. By the time of his discharge in March 1946, he had achieved the rank of Sonarman First Class (SO1) and had earned his mine sweeper patch. He also had been awarded the Bronze Star and the Good Conduct Medal. By virtue of his deployments, Van Cleef also qualified for the European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal, Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, the American Campaign Medal, and the World War II Victory Medal. He was discharged from the Navy in 1946.
Early acting career.
After leaving the Navy, Van Cleef read for a part in "Our Town" at the Little Theater Group in Clinton, New Jersey and received his first stage role. From there, he continued to meet with the group and audition for parts. The next biggest part was that of the boxer, Joe Pendleton, in the play "Heaven Can Wait". During this time, he was observed by visiting talent scouts, who were impressed by Van Cleef's stage presence and delivery. One of these scouts later took him to New York City talent agent Maynard Morris of the MCA agency, who then sent him to the Alvin Theater for an audition. The play was "Mister Roberts".
Van Cleef's screen debut came in "High Noon". During a performance of "Mister Roberts" in Los Angeles, he was noticed by film director Stanley Kramer, who offered Van Cleef a role in his upcoming film. Kramer originally wanted Van Cleef for the role of the deputy Harvey Pell, but as he wanted Van Cleef to have his "distinctive nose" fixed, Van Cleef declined the role in favor of the part of the silent gunslinger Jack Colby. He was then cast mostly in villainous roles, due to his sharp cheeks and chin, piercing eyes, and hawk-like nose, from the part of Tony Romano in "Kansas City Confidential" (1952), culminating 14 years later in Sergio Leone's "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" (1966).
Aside from Westerns and the science fiction films, three of his early major roles were in noir films, "Kansas City Confidential" (1952), "Vice Squad" (1953) and "The Big Combo" (1955). Van Cleef appeared six times between 1951 and 1955 on the children's syndicated Western series "The Adventures of Kit Carson", starring Bill Williams. He was cast three times, including the role of Rocky Hatch in the episode "Greed Rides the Range" (1952), of another syndicated Western series, "The Range Rider". In 1952, he was cast in the episode "Formula for Fear" of the Western aviation series "Sky King". He appeared in episode 82 of the TV series "The Lone Ranger" in 1952. In 1954, Van Cleef appeared as Jesse James in the syndicated series "Stories of the Century".
In 1955, he was cast twice on another syndicated Western series, "Annie Oakley". That same year, he guest-starred on the CBS Western series, "Brave Eagle". In 1955, he played one of the two villains in an episode of "The Adventures of Champion" the Wonder Horse. In 1958, he was cast as Ed Murdock, a rodeo performer trying to reclaim the title in the event at Madison Square Garden in New York City, on "Richard Diamond, Private Detective".
Van Cleef played different characters on four episodes of ABC's "The Rifleman", with Chuck Connors, between 1959 and 1962, and twice on ABC's "Tombstone Territory". In 1958, he was cast as Deputy Sid Carver in the episode "The Great Stagecoach Robbery" of another syndicated Western series, "Frontier Doctor", starring Rex Allen. In 1959, Van Cleef appeared as Luke Clagg in the episode "Strange Request" of the NBC Western series "Riverboat" starring Darren McGavin, as Jumbo Kane in the episode "The Hostage" on the CBS Western series "Wanted Dead or Alive" starring Steve McQueen, and in an episode of "Maverick" titled "Red Dog" in 1960 starring Roger Moore and John Carradine.
Van Cleef played a sentry on an episode of the ABC sitcom "The Real McCoys", with Walter Brennan. Van Cleef was cast with Pippa Scott and again with Chuck Connors in the 1960 episode "Trial by Fear" of the CBS anthology series "The DuPont Show with June Allyson". A young Van Cleef also made an appearance on "The Andy Griffith Show" and as Frank Diamond in "The Untouchables", in an episode entitled "The Unhired Assassin". He also appeared in an episode of the ABC/Warner Brothers Western series "The Alaskans".
Van Cleef guest-starred on the CBS Western series "Have Gun – Will Travel", on the ABC/Warner Bros. series "Colt .45", on the NBC Western series "Cimarron City" and "Laramie", and on Rod Cameron's syndicated crime dramas "City Detective" and "State Trooper". He guest-starred in an episode of John Bromfield's syndicated crime drama "Sheriff of Cochise". Van Cleef starred as minor villains and henchmen in various Westerns, including "The Tin Star" and "Gunfight at the O.K. Corral". His film characters died in many of his Westerns and gangster portrayals.
In 1960, he appeared as a villainous swindler in the "Bonanza" episode, "The Bloodline" (December 31, 1960) and also made an appearance on "Gunsmoke". In 1961, he played a role on episode 7 ("The Grave") of the third season of "The Twilight Zone". He played a villainous henchman of Lee Marvin's title character in the 1962 John Ford movie "The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance". In 1963, he appeared on "Perry Mason" (episode: "The Case of the Golden Oranges"). That same year, he appeared in "The Day of the Misfits" on "The Travels of Jaimie McPheeters".
Stardom.
In 1965, Sergio Leone cast Van Cleef, whose career had yet to take off, as a main protagonist alongside Clint Eastwood in "For a Few Dollars More". Leone then chose Van Cleef to appear again with Eastwood, this time as the primary antagonist, Angel Eyes, in the now seminal Western "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" (1966). With his roles in Leone's films, Van Cleef became a major star of Spaghetti Westerns, playing central, and often surprisingly heroic, roles in films such as "The Big Gundown" (1966), "Death Rides a Horse" (1967), "Day of Anger" (1967), and "The Grand Duel" (1972). He played the title role in "Sabata" (1969) and "Return of Sabata" (1971), and co-starred with Jim Brown in an Italian-American co-production, "Take a Hard Ride" (1975). In his final two westerns he co-starred with Leif Garrett in "God's Gun" (1976) and "Kid Vengeance" (1977), both of which were filmed mainly in Israel.
Van Cleef later had a supporting role in John Carpenter's cult film "Escape from New York" (1981). In 1984, he was cast as a ninja master in the NBC adventure series "The Master", but it was canceled after thirteen episodes. In all, Van Cleef is credited with 90 movie roles and 109 television appearances over a 38-year span.
Personal life.
Van Cleef was married three times. His first marriage was to Patsy Ruth Kahle, in 1943. They had three children, Alan, Deborah and David, and divorced in 1958. His second marriage was to Joan Marjorie Drane, from 1960 to 1974. His final marriage was to Barbara Havelone in 1976, who survived him.
He lost the last joint of the middle finger of his right hand while building a playhouse for his daughter.
In 1958, a severe car crash nearly cost Van Cleef his life and career. A resulting knee injury made his physicians think that he would never ride a horse again. This injury plagued Van Cleef for the rest of his life and caused him great pain. His recovery was long and difficult and halted his acting for a time. He then began a business in interior decoration with second wife Joan, as well as pursuing his talent for painting, primarily of sea and landscapes.
Death.
Despite suffering from heart disease from the late 1970s and having a pacemaker installed in the early 1980s, Van Cleef continued to work in films until his death on December 16, 1989, at age 64. He collapsed in his home in Oxnard, California, from a heart attack. Throat cancer was listed as a secondary cause of death. He was buried at Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery, Hollywood Hills, California, with an inscription on his grave marker referring to his many acting performances as a villain: "BEST OF THE BAD".
In popular culture.
"The real Clint Eastwood,
The real Lee Van Cleef,
Ended up in a bar in Hull,
Minus all of their teeth"

