
La Jetée () is a 1962 French science fiction featurette directed by Chris Marker and associated with the Left Bank artistic movement. Constructed almost entirely from still photos, it tells the story of a post-nuclear war experiment in time travel. It is 28 minutes long and shot in black and white.
It won the Prix Jean Vigo for short film. The 1995 science fiction film "12 Monkeys" was inspired by and borrows several concepts directly from "La Jetée".
Plot.
A man (Davos Hanich) is a prisoner in the aftermath of World War III in post-apocalyptic Paris, where survivors live underground in the "Palais de Chaillot" galleries. Scientists research time travel, hoping to send test subjects to different time periods "to call past and future to the rescue of the present". They have difficulty finding subjects who can mentally withstand the shock of time travel. The scientists eventually settle upon the protagonist; his key to the past is a vague but obsessive memory from his pre-war childhood of a woman (Hélène Châtelain) he had seen on the observation platform ("the jetty") at Orly Airport shortly before witnessing a startling incident there. He did not understand exactly what happened, but knew he had seen a man die.
After several attempts, he reaches the pre-war period. He meets the woman from his memory, and they develop a romantic relationship. After his successful passages to the past, the experimenters attempt to send him into the far future. In a brief meeting with the technologically advanced people of the future, he is given a power unit sufficient to regenerate his own destroyed society.
Upon his return, with his mission accomplished, he discerns that he is to be executed by his jailers. He is contacted by the people of the future, who offer to help him escape to their time permanently; but he asks instead to be returned to the pre-war time of his childhood, hoping to find the woman again. He is returned to the past, placed on the jetty at the airport, and it occurs to him that the child version of himself is probably also there at the same time. He is more concerned with locating the woman, and quickly spots her. However, as he rushes to her, he notices an agent of his jailers who has followed him and realizes the agent is about to kill him. In his final moments, he comes to understand that the incident he witnessed as a child, which has haunted him ever since, was his own death.
Production.
"La Jetée" is constructed almost entirely from optically printed photographs playing out as a photomontage of varying rhythm. It contains only one brief shot (of the woman mentioned above sleeping and suddenly waking up) originating on a motion-picture camera, this due to the fact that Marker could only afford to hire one for an afternoon. The stills were taken with a Pentax Spotmatic and the motion-picture segment was shot with a 35 mm Arriflex. The film has no dialogue aside from small sections of muttering in German and people talking in an airport terminal. The story is told by a voice-over narrator. The scene in which the hero and the woman look at a cut-away trunk of a tree is a reference to Alfred Hitchcock's 1958 film "Vertigo" which Marker also references in his 1983 film "Sans soleil".
The editing of "La Jetée" adds to the intensity of the film. With the use of cut-ins and fade-outs, it produces the eerie and unsettling nature adding to the theme of the apocalyptic destruction of World War III. Terry Gilliam, director of "12 Monkeys", describes the editing as "simply poetic" in the combination of editing and soundtrack that is used in the short film.
As the film plays out as a photomontage, the only continuous variable is the sound. The sound used in this production is minimal, showing up in the form of narration, Orchestral score and sound effect. The rhythmic patterns of the soundtrack act as a framework to add to the intensity of the film. "The dissolve is synchronized with the sound. As the story moves from the past to the present, "La Jetee" creates mental continuity." The soundtrack adds to the illusion of movement within the film and the change of time.
Interpretation.
In "Black and Blue", her study of postwar French fiction, Carol Mavor describes "La Jetée" as "taking place in a no-place (u-topia) in no-time (u-chronia)" which she connects to the time and place of the fairy tale. She further elaborates: "even the sound of the title resonates with the fairy-tale surprise of finding oneself in another world: "La Jetée" evokes 'là j'étais' (there I was)". By "u-topia", Mavor does not refer to "utopia" as the word is commonly used; she also describes an ambiguity of dystopia/utopia in the film: "It is dystopia with the hope of utopia, or is it utopia cut by the threat of dystopia."
Tor Books blogger Jake Hinkson summed up his interpretation in the title of an essay about the film, "There's No Escape Out of Time". He elaborated:
Hinkson also addresses the symbolic use of imagery: "The Man is blindfolded with some kind of padded device and he sees images. The Man is chosen for this assignment because ... he has maintained a sharp mind because of his attachment to certain images. Thus a film told through the use of still photos becomes about looking at images." He further observes that Marker himself did not refer to "La Jetée" as a film, but as photo novel.
Yannis Karpouzis makes a structuralistic analysis on "La Jetée", examining it as an intermedial artwork: Chris Marker creates an "archive" of objects and conditions that have a photographic quality of their own and they are followed by the same predicates as pictures. The dialogue between the media (photography and cinematography) and the filmic signifier (film stills, storyline and narration) is constantly in the backdrop.
Reception.
In 2010, "Time" ranked "La Jetée" first in its list of "Top 10 time-travel movies". In 2012, in correspondence with the "Sight &amp; Sound" Poll, the British Film Institute deemed "La Jetée" as the 50th greatest film of all time.
In 1963, Prix Jean Vigo awarded "La Jetée" for "Best Short Film." 
In 1963, "La Jetée" was part of the Locarno International Film Festival.
In 2009, the films was featured in "Buenos Aires Festival Internacional de Cine Independiente.
"La Jetée" was featured in the "Cine//B Film Festival" in 2011.
The International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam had "La Jetée" as a featured film in 2019.
Science fiction writer William Gibson considers the film one of his main influences.
Legacy.
The video for Sigue Sigue Sputnik's 1989 single "Dancerama" is also an homage to "La Jetée".
The film is one of the influences in the video for David Bowie's "Jump They Say" (1993).
Terry Gilliam's "12 Monkeys" (1995) was inspired by and takes several concepts directly from "La Jetée" (acknowledging this debt in the opening credits).
The 2003 short film "La puppé" is both an homage to and a parody of "La Jetée".
The 2007 Mexican film "Year of the Nail", which is told entirely through still photographs, was inspired by "La Jetée".
Kode9 in collaboration with Ms. Haptic, Marcel Weber (aka MFO), and Lucy Benson created an homage to "La Jetée" in 2011, for the Unsound Festival.
Northern Irish rock band Two Door Cinema Club screened the film at the launch party for their 2016 album "Gameshow". The final track on the album, "Je viens de la", is inspired by "La Jetée" and describes the journey of the film's protagonist.
The film was included in the "1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die" by producer Steven Schneider.
Related media.
In 1992, Zone Books released a book which reproduced the film's original images along with the script in both English and French.
Home media release.
In Region 2, the film is available with English subtitles in the "La Jetée/Sans soleil" digipack released by Arte Video. In Region 1, the Criterion Collection has released a "La Jetée/Sans soleil" combination DVD / Blu-ray, which features the option of hearing the English or French narration.

