
Linear prediction is a mathematical operation where future values of a discrete-time signal are estimated as a linear function of previous samples.
In digital signal processing, linear prediction is often called linear predictive coding (LPC) and can thus be viewed as a subset of filter theory. In system analysis, a subfield of mathematics, linear prediction can be viewed as a part of mathematical modelling or optimization.
The prediction model.
The most common representation is
where formula_2 is the predicted signal value, formula_3 the previous observed values, with formula_4, and formula_5 the predictor coefficients. The error generated by this estimate is
where formula_7 is the true signal value.
These equations are valid for all types of (one-dimensional) linear prediction. The differences are found in the way the predictor coefficients formula_5 are chosen.
For multi-dimensional signals the error metric is often defined as
where formula_10 is a suitable chosen vector norm. Predictions such as formula_2 are routinely used within Kalman filters and smoothers to estimate current and past signal values, respectively.
Estimating the parameters.
The most common choice in optimization of parameters formula_5 is the root mean square criterion which is also called the autocorrelation criterion. In this method we minimize the expected value of the squared error formula_13, which yields the equation
for 1 ≤ "j" ≤ "p", where "R" is the autocorrelation of signal "x""n", defined as
and "E" is the expected value. In the multi-dimensional case this corresponds to minimizing the L2 norm.
The above equations are called the normal equations or Yule-Walker equations. In matrix form the equations can be equivalently written as
where the autocorrelation matrix formula_17 is a symmetric, formula_18 Toeplitz matrix with elements formula_19 is the autocorrelation vector formula_20, and formula_21, the parameter vector.
Another, more general, approach is to minimize the sum of squares of the errors defined in the form
where the optimisation problem searching over all formula_5 must now be constrained with formula_24.
On the other hand, if the mean square prediction error is constrained to be unity and the prediction error equation is included on top of the normal equations, the augmented set of equations is obtained as
where the index formula_26 ranges from 0 to formula_27, and formula_17 is a formula_29 matrix.
Specification of the parameters of the linear predictor is a wide topic and a large number of other approaches have been proposed. In fact, the autocorrelation method is the most common and it is used, for example, for speech coding in the GSM standard.
Solution of the matrix equation formula_16 is computationally a relatively expensive process. The Gaussian elimination for matrix inversion is probably the oldest solution but this approach does not efficiently use the symmetry of formula_17. A faster algorithm is the Levinson recursion proposed by Norman Levinson in 1947, which recursively calculates the solution. In particular, the autocorrelation equations above may be more efficiently solved by the Durbin algorithm.
In 1986, Philippe Delsarte and Y.V. Genin proposed an improvement to this algorithm called the split Levinson recursion, which requires about half the number of multiplications and divisions. It uses a special symmetrical property of parameter vectors on subsequent recursion levels. That is, calculations for the optimal predictor containing formula_27 terms make use of similar calculations for the optimal predictor containing formula_33 terms.
Another way of identifying model parameters is to iteratively calculate state estimates using Kalman filters and obtaining maximum likelihood estimates within expectation–maximization algorithms.
For equally-spaced values, a polynomial interpolation is a linear combination of the known values. If the discrete time signal is estimated to obey a polynomial of degree formula_34 then the predictor coefficients formula_5 are given by the corresponding row of the triangle of binomial transform coefficients. This estimate might be suitable for a slowly varying signal with low noise. The predictions for the first few values of formula_27 are

