
The original One World Trade Center (also known as the North Tower, Tower 1, Building One, or 1 WTC) was one of the Twin Towers of the original World Trade Center in New York City. It was completed in 1972, stood at a height of , and was the tallest building in the world until 1973, when surpassed by the Sears Tower in Chicago. It was distinguishable from its twin, the original Two World Trade Center, also known as the South Tower, by the telecommunications antenna on its roof. Including the antenna, the building stood at a total height of . Other things that made the North Tower distinguishable from its twin was that there was a canopy connected to the North Tower's west facade on street level and there was two small pedestrian walkways that extended from the west and south promenades of Three and Six World Trade Center to the North Tower's north and south facades on plaza level, while the South Tower lacked any of those. The building's address was One World Trade Center, and the WTC complex had its own ZIP code (10048) due to its large size.
The original World Trade Center was destroyed in the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001; One World Trade Center was the first of the famous Twin Towers to be struck by a hijacked aircraft (in this case, American Airlines Flight 11), at 8:46 a.m EDT, and the second tower to collapse (in this case, at 10:28 a.m.). The North Tower stood for 102 minutes after the aircraft impact. Of the 2,977 victims killed in the attacks, around 1600 were in the North Tower or on the ground. The North Tower was replaced by the present-day One World Trade Center tower, which was opened in November 2014 as the lead building of the redeveloped World Trade Center site.
Tenants at the time of the attacks.
The tenant list below was compiled from the original list provided by CoStar Group (a provider of electronic commercial real estate information), and quoted by CNN. It was sourced by using UnBlinking.com. Cantor Fitzgerald's corporate headquarters were located in One World Trade Center.
Floor numbers in  red  were part of American Airlines Flight 11’s impact area on September 11, 2001, with floors trapped by the impact numbered in  dark gray .
Sources: CoStar Group, CNN, and Unblinking.
Floor unknown: "Alliance Global Finance, Associated Charter Marine, Carreden Group, CIF Agency, Dimetol International Trade, Eastern Capital Corporation, Falcon International Freight, First Pacific Rim, GAC Shipping, Garwood Financial, Globe Shipping Company, GSI Cargo Service, Hachijuni Bank, Hanil Securities, Lin Brothers International, Pluto Commodities, Port Newark"
92nd floor.
The 92nd floor, though intact and below the initial impact, did not have any survivors. Several 911 calls were recorded from employees at Carr Futures, a tenant on that level. The workers reported that the elevators were destroyed and the stairwells impassable. A number of employees in a meeting were trapped in a conference room when its door jammed shut from the crash; the remainder made their way to an unoccupied area on the west side of the floor initially free of smoke and flames. However, by the time the North Tower collapsed at 10:28 AM, fire had spread to that part of the floor, making conditions there unsurvivable. The last 911 call from that floor came from Tom McGinnis at 10:26 AM.
Tenants that left prior to the attacks.
Between 1978 and 1995, the Consulate of Paraguay was located in Suite 1609 of One World Trade Center. Home Lines once occupied Suite 3969.

