
Loa or ( ;) are the spirits of Haitian Vodou and Louisiana Voodoo. They are intermediaries between Bondye (from French "Bon Dieu", meaning "good God") the Supreme Creator, who is distant from the world and humanity. Loa are not deities in and of themselves. Unlike saints or angels, however, they are not simply prayed to; they are served. They are each distinct beings with their own personal likes and dislikes, distinct sacred rhythms, songs, dances, ritual symbols (veves), and special modes of service.
Etymology.
The origins of the word "loa" are often disputed. Although commonly associated from the French "les lois" ("the laws" in English), "olúwa" (meaning "lord" or "god") from the Yoruba language seems to be strongly supported by modern scholars.
Syncretism.
The enslaved Fon and Ewe in Haiti and Louisiana syncretized the loa with the Catholic saints vodoun altars will frequently display images of Catholic saints. For example, Papa Legba is syncretized with Saint Peter or Lazarus of Bethany.
Syncretism also works the other way in Haitian Vodou and many Catholic saints have become loa in their own right, most notably Philomena, the archangel Michael, Jude the Apostle, and John the Baptist.
Rituals.
In a ritual the loa are called down by the "houngan" (priest), "mambo" (priestess), or the "bokor" and the "caplata" (sorcerers and witches) to take part in the service, receive offerings, and grant requests. The loa arrive in the peristyle (ritual space) by mounting (possessing) a horse (ritualist) in Creole referred as "Chwal" who is said to be "ridden". This can be quite a violent occurrence as the participant can flail about or convulse before falling to the ground, but some loa, such as Ayizan, will mount their "horses" very quietly.
Certain loa display very distinctive behavior by which they can be recognized, specific phrases, and specific actions. As soon as a loa is recognized, the symbols appropriate to them will be given to them. For example, Erzulie Freda will be given a glass of pink champagne, she is sprinkled with her perfumes, fine gifts of food will be presented to her or she even puts on her jewelry; Legba will be given his cane, straw hat, and pipe; Baron Samedi will often fall flat on the floor and the vodousants around him will dress him and prepare him as they do in a morgue with cotton in his nose.
Once the loa have arrived, fed, been served, and possibly given help or advice, they leave the peristyle. Certain loa can become obstinate, for example the guédé are notorious for wanting just one more smoke, or one more drink, but it is the job of the houngan or mambo to keep the spirits in line while ensuring they are adequately provided for.
Nanchon.
There are many families or "nanchon" (from "nations") of loa: rada (also Radha), petro (also pethro, petwo), nago, kongo, and guédé among others.
Rada loa.
The rada loa are generally older, as many of these spirits come from Africa and the kingdom of Dahomey. The rada loa are mainly water spirits and many of the rada loa are served with a water. The rada are "cool" in the sense they are less aggressive than the petro. They include Legba, Loco, Ayizan, Damballa Wedo and Ayida-Weddo, Maîtresse Mambo Erzulie Fréda Dahomey, La Sirène, and Agwé. Many of these spirits are served with white, sometimes in conjunction with another color. For example, Damballa may take white and green in some Vodou houses, or just white in others. Freda may take white and pink in one house, or pink and light blue in another. However, as a rule of thumb, white is a color appropriate to all the rada.
Petro loa.
The petro loa are generally the more fiery, occasionally aggressive and warlike loa, and are associated with Haiti and the New World. They include Ezili Dantor, Marinette, and Met Kalfu (Maitre Carrefour, "Master Crossroads"). Their traditional colour is red. As with the rada, additional colors may be associated with individual petro. Dantor will be served with red, but in different houses may additionally take navy blue, green, or gold.
Kongo loa.
Originating from the Congo region, these loa include the many Simbi loa. It also includes Marinette, a fierce and much feared female loa.
Nago loa.
Originating from Yorubaland, this nation includes many of the Ogoun loa, most of whom use 'Ogou' as a sort of family name. Examples include Ogou Feray, a martial soldier loa; Ogou Bdagris, a wiser general; Ogou Panama, often viewed as a pilot (and an example of how loa can subdivide as the world changes); and Ogou Balendjo, who serves on the ship of the rada ocean loa Agwe.
Guédé loa.
The guédé are the spirits of the unclaimed or unremembered dead, thus categorized separately from one's remembered ancestors. They are traditionally led by the Barons (La Croix, Samedi, Cimitière, Kriminel), and Maman Brigitte. The Gede as a family are loud, rude (although rarely to the point of real insult), sexual, and usually a lot of fun. As those who have lived already, they have nothing to fear, and frequently will display how far past consequence and feeling they are when they come through in a service eating glass, raw chillis, and anointing their sensitive areas with chilli rum, for example. Their traditional colors are black and purple. They are known for the "banda", a dance they perform that mimics sexual intercourse.

