
In mathematics, more specifically calculus, L'Hôpital's rule or L'Hospital's rule (, 
, ) provides a technique to evaluate limits of indeterminate forms. Application (or repeated application) of the rule often converts an indeterminate form to an expression that can be easily evaluated by substitution. The rule is named after the 17th-century French mathematician Guillaume de l'Hôpital. Although the rule is often attributed to L'Hôpital, the theorem was first introduced to him in 1694 by the Swiss mathematician Johann Bernoulli.
L'Hôpital's rule states that for functions and which are differentiable on an open interval except possibly at a point contained in , if formula_1 and formula_2 for all in with , and formula_3 exists, then
The differentiation of the numerator and denominator often simplifies the quotient or converts it to a limit that can be evaluated directly.
History.
Guillaume de l'Hôpital (also written l'Hospital) published this rule in his 1696 book "Analyse des Infiniment Petits pour l'Intelligence des Lignes Courbes" (literal translation: "Analysis of the Infinitely Small for the Understanding of Curved Lines"), the first textbook on differential calculus. However, it is believed that the rule was discovered by the Swiss mathematician Johann Bernoulli.
General form.
The general form of L'Hôpital's rule covers many cases. Let and be extended real numbers (i.e., real numbers, positive infinity, or negative infinity). Let be an open interval containing (for a two-sided limit) or an open interval with endpoint (for a one-sided limit, or a limit at infinity if is infinite). The real valued functions and are assumed to be differentiable on except possibly at , and additionally formula_5 on except possibly at . It is also assumed that formula_6 Thus the rule applies to situations in which the ratio of the derivatives has a finite or infinite limit, but not to situations in which that ratio fluctuates permanently as gets closer and closer to .
If either
or
then
Although we have written "x" → "c" throughout, the limits may also be one-sided limits ("x" → "c"+ or "x" → "c"−), when is a finite endpoint of .
In the second case, the hypothesis that diverges to infinity is not used in the proof (see note at the end of the proof section); thus, while the conditions of the rule are normally stated as above, the second sufficient condition for the rule's procedure to be valid can be more briefly stated as formula_10
The hypothesis that formula_5 appears most commonly in the literature, but some authors sidestep this hypothesis by adding other hypotheses elsewhere. One method is to define the limit of a function with the additional requirement that the limiting function is defined everywhere on the relevant interval except possibly at . Another method is to require that both and be differentiable everywhere on an interval containing .
Requirement that the limit exist.
The requirement that the limit
exists is essential. Without this condition, formula_13 or formula_14 may exhibit undamped oscillations as formula_15 approaches formula_16, in which case L'Hôpital's rule does not apply. For example, if formula_17, formula_18 and formula_19, then
this expression does not approach a limit as formula_15 goes to formula_16, since the cosine function oscillates between and . But working with the original functions, formula_23 can be shown to exist:
In a case such as this, all that can be concluded is that
so that if the limit of "f"/"g" exists, then it must lie between the inferior and superior limits of "f"′/"g"′. (In the example above, this is true, since 1 indeed lies between 0 and 2.)
Complications.
Sometimes L'Hôpital's rule does not lead to an answer in a finite number of steps unless some additional steps are applied. Examples include the following:
A common pitfall is using L'Hôpital's rule with some circular reasoning to compute a derivative via a difference quotient. For example, consider the task of proving the derivative formula for powers of "x":
Applying L'Hôpital's rule and finding the derivatives with respect to of the numerator and the denominator yields 
 as expected. However, differentiating the numerator required the use of the very fact that is being proven. This is an example of begging the question, since one may not assume the fact to be proven during the course of the proof.
Counterexamples when the derivative of the denominator is zero.
The necessity of the condition that formula_5 near formula_16 can be seen by the following counterexample due to Otto Stolz. Let formula_51 and formula_52 Then there is no limit for formula_53 as formula_54 However,
which tends to 0 as formula_56. Further examples of this type were found by Ralph P. Boas Jr.
Other indeterminate forms.
Other indeterminate forms, such as , , , , and , can sometimes be evaluated using L'Hôpital's rule. For example, to evaluate a limit involving , convert the difference of two functions to a quotient:
where L'Hôpital's rule is applied when going from (1) to (2) and again when going from (3) to (4).
L'Hôpital's rule can be used on indeterminate forms involving exponents by using logarithms to "move the exponent down". Here is an example involving the indeterminate form :
It is valid to move the limit inside the exponential function because the exponential function is continuous. Now the exponent formula_15 has been "moved down". The limit formula_60 is of the indeterminate form , but as shown in an example above, l'Hôpital's rule may be used to determine that
Thus
Stolz–Cesàro theorem.
The Stolz–Cesàro theorem is a similar result involving limits of sequences, but it uses finite difference operators rather than derivatives.
Geometric interpretation.
Consider the curve in the plane whose -coordinate is given by and whose -coordinate is given by , with both functions continuous, i.e., the locus of points of the form . Suppose . The limit of the ratio as is the slope of the tangent to the curve at the point . The tangent to the curve at the point is given by . L'Hôpital's rule then states that the slope of the curve when is the limit of the slope of the tangent to the curve as the curve approaches the origin, provided that this is defined.
Proof of L'Hôpital's rule.
Special case.
The proof of L'Hôpital's rule is simple in the case where and are continuously differentiable at the point and where a finite limit is found after the first round of differentiation. It is not a proof of the general L'Hôpital's rule because it is stricter in its definition, requiring both differentiability and that "c" be a real number. Since many common functions have continuous derivatives (e.g. polynomials, sine and cosine, exponential functions), it is a special case worthy of attention.
Suppose that and are continuously differentiable at a real number , that formula_63, and that formula_64. Then
This follows from the difference-quotient definition of the derivative. The last equality follows from the continuity of the derivatives at . The limit in the conclusion is not indeterminate because formula_66.
The proof of a more general version of L'Hôpital's rule is given below.
General proof.
The following proof is due to , where a unified proof for the and indeterminate forms is given. Taylor notes that different proofs may be found in and .
Let "f" and "g" be functions satisfying the hypotheses in the General form section. Let formula_67 be the open interval in the hypothesis with endpoint "c". Considering that formula_5 on this interval and "g" is continuous, formula_67 can be chosen smaller so that "g" is nonzero on formula_67.
For each "x" in the interval, define formula_71 and formula_72 as formula_73 ranges over all values between "x" and "c". (The symbols inf and sup denote the infimum and supremum.)
From the differentiability of "f" and "g" on formula_67, Cauchy's mean value theorem ensures that for any two distinct points "x" and "y" in formula_67 there exists a formula_73 between "x" and "y" such that formula_77. Consequently, formula_78 for all choices of distinct "x" and "y" in the interval. The value "g"("x")-"g"("y") is always nonzero for distinct "x" and "y" in the interval, for if it was not, the mean value theorem would imply the existence of a "p" between "x" and "y" such that "g' "("p")=0.
The definition of "m"("x") and "M"("x") will result in an extended real number, and so it is possible for them to take on the values ±∞. In the following two cases, "m"("x") and "M"("x") will establish bounds on the ratio .
Case 1: formula_79
For any "x" in the interval formula_67, and point "y" between "x" and "c",
and therefore as "y" approaches "c", formula_82 and formula_83 become zero, and so
Case 2: formula_85
For every "x" in the interval formula_67, define formula_87. For every point "y" between "x" and "c",
As "y" approaches "c", both formula_89 and formula_90 become zero, and therefore
The limit superior and limit inferior are necessary since the existence of the limit of has not yet been established.
It is also the case that 
and
In case 1, the squeeze theorem establishes that formula_95 exists and is equal to "L". In the case 2, and the squeeze theorem again asserts that formula_96, and so the limit formula_95 exists and is equal to "L". This is the result that was to be proven.
In case 2 the assumption that "f"("x") diverges to infinity was not used within the proof. This means that if |"g"("x")| diverges to infinity as "x" approaches "c" and both "f" and "g" satisfy the hypotheses of L'Hôpital's rule, then no additional assumption is needed about the limit of "f"("x"): It could even be the case that the limit of "f"("x") does not exist. In this case, L'Hopital's theorem is actually a consequence of Cesàro–Stolz.
In the case when |"g"("x")| diverges to infinity as "x" approaches "c" and "f"("x") converges to a finite limit at "c", then L'Hôpital's rule would be applicable, but not absolutely necessary, since basic limit calculus will show that the limit of "f"("x")/"g"("x") as "x" approaches "c" must be zero.
Corollary.
A simple but very useful consequence of L'Hopital's rule is a well-known criterion for differentiability. It states the following:
suppose that "f" is continuous at "a", and that formula_98 exists for all "x" in some open interval containing "a", except perhaps for formula_99. Suppose, moreover, that formula_100 exists. Then formula_101 also exists and
In particular, "f"' is also continuous at "a".
Proof.
Consider the functions formula_103 and formula_104. The continuity of "f" at "a" tells us that formula_105. Moreover, formula_106 since a polynomial function is always continuous everywhere. Applying L'Hopital's rule shows that formula_107.

