
In mathematics, a Mersenne prime is a prime number that is one less than a power of two. That is, it is a prime number of the form for some integer . They are named after Marin Mersenne, a French Minim friar, who studied them in the early 17th century. If is a composite number then so is . Therefore, an equivalent definition of the Mersenne primes is that they are the prime numbers of the form for some prime .
The exponents which give Mersenne primes are 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 17, 19, 31, ... and the resulting Mersenne primes are 3, 7, 31, 127, 8191, 131071, 524287, 2147483647, ... .
Numbers of the form without the primality requirement may be called Mersenne numbers. Sometimes, however, Mersenne numbers are defined to have the additional requirement that be prime.
The smallest composite Mersenne number with prime exponent "n" is .
Mersenne primes were studied in antiquity because of their close connection to perfect numbers: the Euclid–Euler theorem asserts a one-to-one correspondence between even perfect numbers and Mersenne primes. Many of the largest known primes are Mersenne primes because Mersenne numbers are easier to check for primality.
, 51 Mersenne primes are known. The largest known prime number, , is a Mersenne prime. Since 1997, all newly found Mersenne primes have been discovered by the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, a distributed computing project. In December 2020, a major milestone in the project was passed after all exponents below 100 million were checked at least once.
About Mersenne primes.
Many fundamental questions about Mersenne primes remain unresolved. It is not even known whether the set of Mersenne primes is finite or infinite. The Lenstra–Pomerance–Wagstaff conjecture asserts that there are infinitely many Mersenne primes and predicts their order of growth. It is also not known whether infinitely many Mersenne numbers with prime exponents are composite, although this would follow from widely believed conjectures about prime numbers, for example, the infinitude of Sophie Germain primes congruent to 3 (mod 4). For these primes , (which is also prime) will divide , for example, , , , , , , , and . Since for these primes , is congruent to 7 mod 8, so 2 is a quadratic residue mod , and the multiplicative order of 2 mod must divide formula_1 = . Since is a prime, it must be or 1. However, it cannot be 1 since formula_2 and 1 has no prime factors, so it must be . Hence, divides formula_3 and formula_4 cannot be prime.
The first four Mersenne primes are , , and and because the first Mersenne prime starts at , all Mersenne primes are congruent to 3 (mod 4). Other than and , all other Mersenne numbers are also congruent to 3 (mod 4). Consequently, in the prime factorization of a Mersenne number (  ) there must be at least one prime factor congruent to 3 (mod 4).
A basic theorem about Mersenne numbers states that if is prime, then the exponent must also be prime. This follows from the identity
This rules out primality for Mersenne numbers with composite exponent, such as .
Though the above examples might suggest that is prime for all primes , this is not the case, and the smallest counterexample is the Mersenne number
The evidence at hand suggests that a randomly selected Mersenne number is much more likely to be prime than an arbitrary randomly selected odd integer of similar size. Nonetheless, prime values of appear to grow increasingly sparse as increases. For example, eight of the first 11 primes give rise to a Mersenne prime (the correct terms on Mersenne's original list), while is prime for only 43 of the first two million prime numbers (up to 32,452,843).
The lack of any simple test to determine whether a given Mersenne number is prime makes the search for Mersenne primes a difficult task, since Mersenne numbers grow very rapidly. The Lucas–Lehmer primality test (LLT) is an efficient primality test that greatly aids this task, making it much easier to test the primality of Mersenne numbers than that of most other numbers of the same size. The search for the largest known prime has somewhat of a cult following. Consequently, a lot of computer power has been expended searching for new Mersenne primes, much of which is now done using distributed computing.
Arithmetic modulo a Mersenne number is particularly efficient on a binary computer, making them popular choices when a prime modulus is desired, such as the Park–Miller random number generator. To find a primitive polynomial of Mersenne number order requires knowing the factorization of that number, so Mersenne primes allow one to find to primitive polynomials of very high order. Such primitive trinomials are used in pseudorandom number generators with very large periods such as the Mersenne twister, generalized shift register and Lagged Fibonacci generators.
Perfect numbers.
Mersenne primes are closely connected to perfect numbers. In the 4th century BC, Euclid proved that if is prime, then ) is a perfect number. In the 18th century, Leonhard Euler proved that, conversely, all even perfect numbers have this form. This is known as the Euclid–Euler theorem. It is unknown whether there are any odd perfect numbers.
History.
Mersenne primes take their name from the 17th-century French scholar Marin Mersenne, who compiled what was supposed to be a list of Mersenne primes with exponents up to 257. The exponents listed by Mersenne were as follows:
His list replicated the known primes of his time with exponents up to 19. His next entry, 31, was correct, but the list then became largely incorrect, as Mersenne mistakenly included and (which are composite) and omitted , , and (which are prime). Mersenne gave little indication of how he came up with his list.
Édouard Lucas proved in 1876 that is indeed prime, as Mersenne claimed. This was the largest known prime number for 75 years, and the largest ever found manually (without the aid of computers). was determined to be prime in 1883 by Ivan Mikheevich Pervushin, though Mersenne claimed it was composite, and for this reason it is sometimes called Pervushin's number. This was the second-largest known prime number, and it remained so until 1911. Lucas had shown another error in Mersenne's list in 1876. Without finding a factor, Lucas demonstrated that is actually composite. No factor was found until a famous talk by Frank Nelson Cole in 1903. Without speaking a word, he went to a blackboard and raised 2 to the 67th power, then subtracted one. On the other side of the board, he multiplied and got the same number, then returned to his seat (to applause) without speaking. He later said that the result had taken him "three years of Sundays" to find. A correct list of all Mersenne primes in this number range was completed and rigorously verified only about three centuries after Mersenne published his list.
Searching for Mersenne primes.
Fast algorithms for finding Mersenne primes are available, and the seven largest known prime numbers are Mersenne primes.
The first four Mersenne primes , , and were known in antiquity. The fifth, , was discovered anonymously before 1461; the next two ( and ) were found by Pietro Cataldi in 1588. After nearly two centuries, was verified to be prime by Leonhard Euler in 1772. The next (in historical, not numerical order) was , found by Édouard Lucas in 1876, then by Ivan Mikheevich Pervushin in 1883. Two more ( and ) were found early in the 20th century, by R. E. Powers in 1911 and 1914, respectively.
The best method presently known for testing the primality of Mersenne numbers is the Lucas–Lehmer primality test. Specifically, it can be shown that for prime , is prime if and only if divides , where and for .
During the era of manual calculation, all the exponents up to and including 257 were tested with the Lucas–Lehmer test and found to be composite. A notable contribution was made by retired Yale physics professor Horace Scudder Uhler, who did the calculations for exponents 157, 167, 193, 199, 227, and 229. Unfortunately for those investigators, the interval they were testing contains the largest known relative gap between Mersenne primes: the next Mersenne prime exponent, 521, would turn out to be more than four times larger than the previous record of 127.
The search for Mersenne primes was revolutionized by the introduction of the electronic digital computer. Alan Turing searched for them on the Manchester Mark 1 in 1949, but the first successful identification of a Mersenne prime, , by this means was achieved at 10:00 pm on January 30, 1952 using the U.S. National Bureau of Standards Western Automatic Computer (SWAC) at the Institute for Numerical Analysis at the University of California, Los Angeles, under the direction of Lehmer, with a computer search program written and run by Prof. R. M. Robinson. It was the first Mersenne prime to be identified in thirty-eight years; the next one, , was found by the computer a little less than two hours later. Three more — , , and  — were found by the same program in the next several months. is the first Mersenne prime that is titanic, is the first gigantic, and was the first megaprime to be discovered, being a prime with at least 1,000,000 digits. All three were the first known prime of any kind of that size. The number of digits in the decimal representation of equals , where denotes the floor function (or equivalently ).
In September 2008, mathematicians at UCLA participating in the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) won part of a $100,000 prize from the Electronic Frontier Foundation for their discovery of a very nearly 13-million-digit Mersenne prime. The prize, finally confirmed in October 2009, is for the first known prime with at least 10 million digits. The prime was found on a Dell OptiPlex 745 on August 23, 2008. This was the eighth Mersenne prime discovered at UCLA.
On April 12, 2009, a GIMPS server log reported that a 47th Mersenne prime had possibly been found. The find was first noticed on June 4, 2009, and verified a week later. The prime is . Although it is chronologically the 47th Mersenne prime to be discovered, it is smaller than the largest known at the time, which was the 45th to be discovered.
On January 25, 2013, Curtis Cooper, a mathematician at the University of Central Missouri, discovered a 48th Mersenne prime, (a number with 17,425,170 digits), as a result of a search executed by a GIMPS server network.
On January 19, 2016, Cooper published his discovery of a 49th Mersenne prime, (a number with 22,338,618 digits), as a result of a search executed by a GIMPS server network. This was the fourth Mersenne prime discovered by Cooper and his team in the past ten years.
On September 2, 2016, the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search finished verifying all tests below M37,156,667, thus officially confirming its position as the 45th Mersenne prime.
On January 3, 2018, it was announced that Jonathan Pace, a 51-year-old electrical engineer living in Germantown, Tennessee, had found a 50th Mersenne prime, (a number with 23,249,425 digits), as a result of a search executed by a GIMPS server network. The discovery was made by a computer in the offices of a church in the same town.
On December 21, 2018, it was announced that The Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) discovered the largest known prime number, , having 24,862,048 digits. A computer volunteered by Patrick Laroche from Ocala, Florida made the find on December 7, 2018.
List of known Mersenne primes.
The table below lists all known Mersenne primes (sequence () and () in OEIS):
All Mersenne numbers below the 51st Mersenne prime () have been tested at least once but some have not been double-checked. Primes are not always discovered in increasing order. For example, the 29th Mersenne prime was discovered "after" the 30th and the 31st. Similarly, was followed by two smaller Mersenne primes, first 2 weeks later and then 9 months later. was the first discovered prime number with more than 10 million decimal digits.
The largest known Mersenne prime is also the largest known prime number.
The largest known prime has been a Mersenne prime since 1952, except between 1989 and 1992.
Factorization of composite Mersenne numbers.
Since they are prime numbers, Mersenne primes are divisible only by 1 and by themselves. However, not all Mersenne numbers are Mersenne primes, and the composite Mersenne numbers may be factored non-trivially. Mersenne numbers are very good test cases for the special number field sieve algorithm, so often the largest number factorized with this algorithm has been a Mersenne number. , 2 − 1 is the record-holder, having been factored with a variant of the special number field sieve that allows the factorization of several numbers at once. See integer factorization records for links to more information. The special number field sieve can factorize numbers with more than one large factor. If a number has only one very large factor then other algorithms can factorize larger numbers by first finding small factors and then making a primality test on the cofactor. , the largest factorization with probable prime factors allowed is , where is a 2,201,714-digit probable prime. It was discovered by Oliver Kruse. , the Mersenne number "M"1277 is the smallest composite Mersenne number with no known factors; it has no prime factors below 267.
The table below shows factorizations for the first 20 composite Mersenne numbers .
The number of factors for the first 500 Mersenne numbers can be found at .
Mersenne numbers in nature and elsewhere.
In the mathematical problem Tower of Hanoi, solving a puzzle with an -disc tower requires steps, assuming no mistakes are made. The number of rice grains on the whole chessboard in the wheat and chessboard problem is .
The asteroid with minor planet number 8191 is named 8191 Mersenne after Marin Mersenne, because 8191 is a Mersenne prime (3 Juno, 7 Iris, 31 Euphrosyne and 127 Johanna having been discovered and named during the 19th century).
In geometry, an integer right triangle that is primitive and has its even leg a power of 2 (  ) generates a unique right triangle such that its inradius is always a Mersenne number. For example, if the even leg is then because it is primitive it constrains the odd leg to be , the hypotenuse to be and its inradius to be .
The Mersenne numbers were studied with respect to the total number of accepting paths of non-deterministic polynomial time Turing machines in 2018 and intriguing inclusions were discovered.
Mersenne–Fermat primes.
A Mersenne–Fermat number is defined as , with prime, natural number, and can be written as . When , it is a Mersenne number. When , it is a Fermat number. The only known Mersenne–Fermat primes with are
In fact, , where is the cyclotomic polynomial.
Generalizations.
The simplest generalized Mersenne primes are prime numbers of the form , where is a low-degree polynomial with small integer coefficients. An example is , in this case, , and ; another example is , in this case, , and .
It is also natural to try to generalize primes of the form to primes of the form (for and ). However (see also theorems above), is always divisible by , so unless the latter is a unit, the former is not a prime. This can be remedied by allowing "b" to be an algebraic integer instead of an integer:
Complex numbers.
In the ring of integers (on real numbers), if is a unit, then is either 2 or 0. But are the usual Mersenne primes, and the formula does not lead to anything interesting (since it is always −1 for all ). Thus, we can regard a ring of "integers" on complex numbers instead of real numbers, like Gaussian integers and Eisenstein integers.
Gaussian Mersenne primes.
If we regard the ring of Gaussian integers, we get the case and , and can ask (WLOG) for which the number is a Gaussian prime which will then be called a Gaussian Mersenne prime.
 is a Gaussian prime for the following :
Like the sequence of exponents for usual Mersenne primes, this sequence contains only (rational) prime numbers.
As for all Gaussian primes, the norms (that is, squares of absolute values) of these numbers are rational primes:
Eisenstein Mersenne primes.
One may encounter cases where such a Mersenne prime is also an "Eisenstein prime", being of the form and . In these cases, such numbers are called Eisenstein Mersenne primes.
 is an Eisenstein prime for the following :
The norms (that is, squares of absolute values) of these Eisenstein primes are rational primes:
Divide an integer.
Repunit primes.
The other way to deal with the fact that is always divisible by , it is to simply take out this factor and ask which values of make
be prime. (The integer can be either positive or negative.) If, for example, we take , we get values of:
These primes are called repunit primes. Another example is when we take , we get values of:
It is a conjecture that for every integer which is not a perfect power, there are infinitely many values of such that is prime. (When is a perfect power, it can be shown that there is at most one value such that is prime)
Least such that is prime are (starting with , if no such exists)
For negative bases , they are (starting with , if no such exists)
Least base such that is prime are
For negative bases , they are
Other generalized Mersenne primes.
Another generalized Mersenne number is
with , any coprime integers, and . (Since is always divisible by , the division is necessary for there to be any chance of finding prime numbers. In fact, this number is the same as the Lucas number , since and are the roots of the quadratic equation , and this number equals 1 when ) We can ask which makes this number prime. It can be shown that such must be primes themselves or equal to 4, and can be 4 if and only if and is prime. (Since . Thus, in this case the pair must be and must be prime. That is, must be in .) It is a conjecture that for any pair such that for every natural number , and are not both perfect th powers, and is not a perfect fourth power. there are infinitely many values of such that is prime. (When and are both perfect th powers for an or when is a perfect fourth power, it can be shown that there are at most two values with this property, since if so, then can be factored algebraically) However, this has not been proved for any single value of .
A conjecture related to the generalized Mersenne primes: (the conjecture predicts where is the next generalized Mersenne prime, if the conjecture is true, then there are infinitely many primes for all such pairs)
For any integers and which satisfy the conditions:
has prime numbers of the form
for prime , the prime numbers will be distributed near the best fit line
where
and there are about
prime numbers of this form less than .
We also have the following three properties:
If this conjecture is true, then for all such pairs, let be the th prime of the form , the graph of versus is almost linear. (See )
When , it is , a difference of two consecutive perfect th powers, and if is prime, then must be , because it is divisible by .
Least such that is prime are
Least such that is prime are

