
Michael Kenneth Mann (born February 5, 1943) is an American director, screenwriter, and producer of film and television who is best known for his distinctive style of crime drama. His most acclaimed works include the films "Thief" (1981), "Manhunter" (1986), "The Last of the Mohicans" (1992), "Heat" (1995), "The Insider" (1999), "Collateral" (2004), and "Public Enemies" (2009). He is also known for his role as executive producer on the popular TV series "Miami Vice" (1984–89), which he later adapted into a 2006 feature film.
For his work, he has received nominations from international organizations and juries, including the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, Cannes, and the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. "Total Film" ranked Mann No. 28 on its list of the 100 Greatest Directors Ever, "Sight and Sound" ranked him No. 5 on their list of the 10 Best Directors of the Last 25 Years, and "Entertainment Weekly" ranked Mann No. 8 on their 25 Greatest Active Film Directors list.
Early life and education.
Mann was born February 5, 1943, in Chicago, Illinois, to a family of Jewish ancestry. He is the son of grocers Esther and Jack Mann.
He received a B.A. in English at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. While a student, he saw Stanley Kubrick's "Dr. Strangelove" and fell in love with movies. In an "L.A. Weekly" interview, he described the film's impact on him: "It said to my whole generation of filmmakers that you could make an individual statement of high integrity and have that film be successfully seen by a mass audience all at the same time. In other words, you didn't have to be making "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers" if you wanted to work in the mainstream film industry, or be reduced to niche filmmaking if you wanted to be serious about cinema. So that's what Kubrick meant, aside from the fact that "Strangelove" was a revelation." He later earned his M.A. at London Film School.
His daughter Ami Canaan Mann is also a film director and producer.
Career.
Early work.
Mann later moved to London in the mid 1960s to go to graduate school in cinema. He went on to receive a graduate degree at the London Film School in 1967. He spent seven years in the United Kingdom going to film school and then working on commercials along with contemporaries Alan Parker, Ridley Scott and Adrian Lyne. In 1968, footage he shot of the Paris student revolt for a documentary, "Insurrection", aired on NBC's "First Tuesday" news program and he developed his '68 experiences into the short film "Jaunpuri" which won the Jury Prize at Cannes in 1970.
Mann returned to United States after divorcing his first wife in 1971. He went on to direct a road trip documentary, "17 Days Down the Line". Three years later, "Hawaii Five-O" veteran Robert Lewin gave Mann a shot and a crash course on television writing and story structure. Mann wrote four episodes of "Starsky and Hutch" (three in the first series and one in the second) and the pilot episode for "Vega$". Around this time, he worked on a show called "Police Story" with cop-turned-novelist Joseph Wambaugh. "Police Story" concentrated on the detailed realism of a real cop's life and taught Mann that first-hand research was essential to bring authenticity to his work. Mann also wrote an early draft of the 1978 film "Straight Time".
1980s.
His first feature movie was a television special called "The Jericho Mile", which was released theatrically in Europe. It won the Emmy for Outstanding Writing in a Limited Series or a Special in 1979 and the DGA Best Director award.
His television work also includes being the executive producer on "Miami Vice" and "Crime Story". Contrary to popular belief, he was not the creator of these shows, but the executive producer and showrunner, produced by his production company.
Mann's debut feature in cinema as director was "Thief" (1981) starring James Caan, a relatively accurate depiction of thieves that operated in New York City and Chicago at that time. Mann used actual former professional burglars to keep the technical scenes as genuine as possible. His next film was "The Keep" (1983), a supernatural thriller set in Nazi-occupied Romania. Though it was a commercial flop, the film has since attained cult status amongst fans.
In 1986, Mann was the first to bring Thomas Harris' character of serial killer Hannibal Lecter to the screen with "Manhunter", his adaptation of the novel "Red Dragon", which starred Brian Cox as Hannibal. In an interview on the "Manhunter" DVD, star William Petersen comments that because Mann is so focused on his creations, it takes several years for him to complete a film; Petersen believes that this is why Mann does not make films very often.
1990s.
Mann gained widespread recognition in 1992 for his film adaptation of James Fenimore Cooper's novel into the epic historical drama "The Last of the Mohicans" starring Daniel Day-Lewis. The film is set during the French and Indian War. Owen Gleiberman film critic of "Entertainment Weekly" described Mann's directorial style writing, "Mann, at his best, is a master of violence and lyrical anxiety". Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" praised Mann's directing writing, "the action is richly detailed and thrillingly staged." 
This was followed by crime drama "Heat" (1995) starring Al Pacino, Robert De Niro, and Val Kilmer. The film was a critical success with Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" called the film a "sleek, accomplished piece of work, meticulously controlled and completely involving. The dark end of the street doesn't get much more inviting than this." Todd McCarthy of "Variety" wrote, "Stunningly made and incisively acted by a large and terrific cast, Michael Mann's ambitious study of the relativity of good and evil stands apart from other films of its type by virtue of its extraordinarily rich characterizations and its thoughtful, deeply melancholy take on modern life." 
In 1999, Mann's film "The Insider" about the "60 Minutes" segment about Jeffrey Wigand, a whistleblower in the tobacco industry. Russell Crowe portrayed Wigand, with Al Pacino playing Lowell Bergman, and Christopher Plummer as Mike Wallace. The film showcased Mann's cinematic style and garnered the most critical recognition of his career up to this point. "The Insider" was nominated for seven Academy Awards as a result, including a nomination for Mann's direction. Critic Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" praised the film writing, ""The Insider" had a greater impact on me than "All the President's Men", because you know what? Watergate didn't kill my parents. Cigarettes did."
2000s.
With his next film, "Ali" (2001), starring Will Smith, Mann started experimenting with digital cameras. For his action thriller film "Collateral", which cast Tom Cruise against type by giving him the role of a hitman, Mann shot all of the exterior scenes digitally so that he could achieve more depth and detail during the night scenes while shooting most of the interiors on film stock. Jamie Foxx was nominated for an Academy Award for his performance in "Collateral". In 2004, Mann produced "The Aviator", based on the life of Howard Hughes, which he had developed with Leonardo DiCaprio. "The Aviator" was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture but lost to "Million Dollar Baby". After "Collateral", Mann directed the film adaptation of "Miami Vice" which he also executive produced. It stars a completely new cast with Colin Farrell as Don Johnson's character Sonny Crockett, and Jamie Foxx filling Philip Michael Thomas' shoes.
Mann was producer with Peter Berg as director for "The Kingdom" and "Hancock". "Hancock" stars Will Smith as a hard-drinking superhero who has fallen out of favor with the public and who begins to have a relationship with the wife (Charlize Theron) of a public relations expert (Jason Bateman), who is helping him to repair his image. Mann also makes a cameo appearance in the film as an executive.
In 2009, Mann wrote and directed "Public Enemies" for Universal Pictures, about the Depression-era crime wave, based on Brian Burrough's nonfiction book, "Public Enemies: America's Greatest Crime Wave and the Birth of the FBI, 1933–34". It starred Johnny Depp and Christian Bale. Depp played John Dillinger in the film, and Bale played Melvin Purvis, the FBI agent in charge of capturing Dillinger.
2010s.
In January 2010 it was reported by "Variety" that Mann, alongside David Milch, would serve as co-executive producer of new TV series "Luck". The series was an hour-long HBO production, and Mann directed the series' pilot. Although initially renewed for a second season after the airing of the pilot, it was eventually cancelled due to the death of three horses during production.
On February 14, 2013, it was announced that Mann had been developing an untitled thriller film with screenwriter Morgan Davis Foehl for over a year, for Legendary Pictures. In May 2013, Mann started filming the action thriller, named "Blackhat", in Los Angeles, Kuala Lumpur, Hong Kong and Jakarta. The film, starring Chris Hemsworth as a hacker who gets released from prison to pursue a cyberterrorist across the globe, was released on January 16, 2015 by Universal. It received mixed reviews and was a commercial disaster, although many critics included it in their year-end "best-of" lists.
2020s.
Mann will next direct "Ferrari", from a screenplay he wrote about Ferrari founder Enzo Ferrari, with Hugh Jackman set to portray the role of Ferrari. Mann will direct the pilot episode of "Tokyo Vice" for HBO Max.
Filming style and themes.
His trademarks include powerfully-lit nighttime scenes and unusual scores, such as Tangerine Dream in "Thief" or the new-age score to "Manhunter". A common stylistic device in several films ("Last of the Mohicans, Heat, The Insider") is to show principal characters being forced to make critical decisions affecting the plot while overlooking large bodies of water.
Dante Spinotti is a frequent cinematographer of Mann's films.
F.X. Feeney describes Mann's body of work in "DGA Quarterly" as "abundantly energetic in its precision and variety" and "psychologically layered".
"Indiewire"'s 2014 retrospective of the director's filmography focused on the intensity of Mann's ongoing interest in "stories pitting criminals against those who seek to put them behind bars ("Heat, Public Enemies, Thief, Collateral, Miami Vice"). His films frequently suggest that in fact, at the top of their respective games, crooks and cops are not so dissimilar as men: they each live and die by their own codes and they each recognize themselves in the other."
Advertising.
Mann directed the 2002 "Lucky Star" advertisement for Mercedes-Benz, which took the form of a film trailer for a purported thriller featuring Benicio del Toro. In the fall of 2007, Mann directed two commercials for Nike. The ad campaign "Leave Nothing" features football action scenes with former NFL players Shawne Merriman and Steven Jackson, as well as using the score "Promontory" from the soundtrack of "The Last of the Mohicans". Mann also directed the 2008 promotional video for Ferrari's California sports car.
Favorite films.
In 2012, Mann participated in the "Sight &amp; Sound" film polls of that year. Held every ten years to select the greatest films of all time, contemporary directors were asked to select ten films of their choice. Mann gave the following ten in alphabetical order.
External links.
Interviews

