
The mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics are those mathematical formalisms that permit a rigorous description of quantum mechanics. This mathematical formalism uses mainly a part of functional analysis, especially Hilbert space which is a kind of linear space. Such are distinguished from mathematical formalisms for physics theories developed prior to the early 1900s by the use of abstract mathematical structures, such as infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces (L2 space mainly), and operators on these spaces. In brief, values of physical observables such as energy and momentum were no longer considered as values of functions on phase space, but as eigenvalues; more precisely as spectral values of linear operators in Hilbert space.
These formulations of quantum mechanics continue to be used today. At the heart of the description are ideas of "quantum state" and "quantum observables" which are radically different from those used in previous models of physical reality. While the mathematics permits calculation of many quantities that can be measured experimentally, there is a definite theoretical limit to values that can be simultaneously measured. This limitation was first elucidated by Heisenberg through a thought experiment, and is represented mathematically in the new formalism by the non-commutativity of operators representing quantum observables.
Prior to the development of quantum mechanics as a separate theory, the mathematics used in physics consisted mainly of formal mathematical analysis, beginning with calculus, and increasing in complexity up to differential geometry and partial differential equations. Probability theory was used in statistical mechanics. Geometric intuition played a strong role in the first two and, accordingly, theories of relativity were formulated entirely in terms of differential geometric concepts. The phenomenology of quantum physics arose roughly between 1895 and 1915, and for the 10 to 15 years before the development of quantum theory (around 1925) physicists continued to think of quantum theory within the confines of what is now called classical physics, and in particular within the same mathematical structures. The most sophisticated example of this is the Sommerfeld–Wilson–Ishiwara quantization rule, which was formulated entirely on the classical phase space.
History of the formalism.
The "old quantum theory" and the need for new mathematics.
In the 1890s, Planck was able to derive the blackbody spectrum which was later used to avoid the classical ultraviolet catastrophe by making the unorthodox assumption that, in the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter, energy could only be exchanged in discrete units which he called quanta. Planck postulated a direct proportionality between the frequency of radiation and the quantum of energy at that frequency. The proportionality constant, , is now called Planck's constant in his honor.
In 1905, Einstein explained certain features of the photoelectric effect by assuming that Planck's energy quanta were actual particles, which were later dubbed photons. 
All of these developments were phenomenological and challenged the theoretical physics of the time. Bohr and Sommerfeld went on to modify classical mechanics in an attempt to deduce the Bohr model from first principles. They proposed that, of all closed classical orbits traced by a mechanical system in its phase space, only the ones that enclosed an area which was a multiple of Planck's constant were actually allowed. The most sophisticated version of this formalism was the so-called Sommerfeld–Wilson–Ishiwara quantization. Although the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom could be explained in this way, the spectrum of the helium atom (classically an unsolvable 3-body problem) could not be predicted. The mathematical status of quantum theory remained uncertain for some time.
In 1923, de Broglie proposed that wave–particle duality applied not only to photons but to electrons and every other physical system.
The situation changed rapidly in the years 1925–1930, when working mathematical foundations were found through the groundbreaking work of Erwin Schrödinger, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, Pascual Jordan, and the foundational work of John von Neumann, Hermann Weyl and Paul Dirac, and it became possible to unify several different approaches in terms of a fresh set of ideas. The physical interpretation of the theory was also clarified in these years after Werner Heisenberg discovered the uncertainty relations and Niels Bohr introduced the idea of complementarity.
The "new quantum theory".
Werner Heisenberg's matrix mechanics was the first successful attempt at replicating the observed quantization of atomic spectra. Later in the same year, Schrödinger created his wave mechanics. Schrödinger's formalism was considered easier to understand, visualize and calculate as it led to differential equations, which physicists were already familiar with solving. Within a year, it was shown that the two theories were equivalent.
Schrödinger himself initially did not understand the fundamental probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, as he thought that the absolute square of the wave function of an electron should be interpreted as the charge density of an object smeared out over an extended, possibly infinite, volume of space. It was Max Born who introduced the interpretation of the absolute square of the wave function as the probability distribution of the position of a "pointlike" object. Born's idea was soon taken over by Niels Bohr in Copenhagen who then became the "father" of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. Schrödinger's wave function can be seen to be closely related to the classical Hamilton–Jacobi equation. The correspondence to classical mechanics was even more explicit, although somewhat more formal, in Heisenberg's matrix mechanics. In his PhD thesis project, Paul Dirac discovered that the equation for the operators in the Heisenberg representation, as it is now called, closely translates to classical equations for the dynamics of certain quantities in the Hamiltonian formalism of classical mechanics, when one expresses them through Poisson brackets, a procedure now known as canonical quantization.
To be more precise, already before Schrödinger, the young postdoctoral fellow Werner Heisenberg invented his matrix mechanics, which was the first correct quantum mechanics–– the essential breakthrough. Heisenberg's matrix mechanics formulation was based on algebras of infinite matrices, a very radical formulation in light of the mathematics of classical physics, although he started from the index-terminology of the experimentalists of that time, not even aware that his "index-schemes" were matrices, as Born soon pointed out to him. In fact, in these early years, linear algebra was not generally popular with physicists in its present form.
Although Schrödinger himself after a year proved the equivalence of his wave-mechanics and Heisenberg's matrix mechanics, the reconciliation of the two approaches and their modern abstraction as motions in Hilbert space is generally attributed to Paul Dirac, who wrote a lucid account in his 1930 classic "The Principles of Quantum Mechanics". He is the third, and possibly most important, pillar of that field (he soon was the only one to have discovered a relativistic generalization of the theory). In his above-mentioned account, he introduced the bra–ket notation, together with an abstract formulation in terms of the Hilbert space used in functional analysis; he showed that Schrödinger's and Heisenberg's approaches were two different representations of the same theory, and found a third, most general one, which represented the dynamics of the system. His work was particularly fruitful in all kinds of generalizations of the field.
The first complete mathematical formulation of this approach, known as the Dirac–von Neumann axioms, is generally credited to John von Neumann's 1932 book "Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics", although Hermann Weyl had already referred to Hilbert spaces (which he called "unitary spaces") in his 1927 classic paper and book. It was developed in parallel with a new approach to the mathematical spectral theory based on linear operators rather than the quadratic forms that were David Hilbert's approach a generation earlier. Though theories of quantum mechanics continue to evolve to this day, there is a basic framework for the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics which underlies most approaches and can be traced back to the mathematical work of John von Neumann. In other words, discussions about "interpretation" of the theory, and extensions to it, are now mostly conducted on the basis of shared assumptions about the mathematical foundations.
Later developments.
The application of the new quantum theory to electromagnetism resulted in quantum field theory, which was developed starting around 1930. Quantum field theory has driven the development of more sophisticated formulations of quantum mechanics, of which the ones presented here are simple special cases. 
A related topic is the relationship to classical mechanics. Any new physical theory is supposed to reduce to successful old theories in some approximation. For quantum mechanics, this translates into the need to study the so-called classical limit of quantum mechanics. Also, as Bohr emphasized, human cognitive abilities and language are inextricably linked to the classical realm, and so classical descriptions are intuitively more accessible than quantum ones. In particular, quantization, namely the construction of a quantum theory whose classical limit is a given and known classical theory, becomes an important area of quantum physics in itself.
Finally, some of the originators of quantum theory (notably Einstein and Schrödinger) were unhappy with what they thought were the philosophical implications of quantum mechanics. In particular, Einstein took the position that quantum mechanics must be incomplete, which motivated research into so-called hidden-variable theories. The issue of hidden variables has become in part an experimental issue with the help of quantum optics.
Mathematical structure of quantum mechanics.
A physical system is generally described by three basic ingredients: states; observables; and dynamics (or law of time evolution) or, more generally, a group of physical symmetries. A classical description can be given in a fairly direct way by a phase space model of mechanics: states are points in a symplectic phase space, observables are real-valued functions on it, time evolution is given by a one-parameter group of symplectic transformations of the phase space, and physical symmetries are realized by symplectic transformations. A quantum description normally consists of a Hilbert space of states, observables are self adjoint operators on the space of states, time evolution is given by a one-parameter group of unitary transformations on the Hilbert space of states, and physical symmetries are realized by unitary transformations. (It is possible, to map this Hilbert-space picture to a phase space formulation, invertibly. See below.)
Postulates of quantum mechanics.
The following summary of the mathematical framework of quantum mechanics can be partly traced back to the Dirac–von Neumann axioms. The postulates are canonically presented in six statements, though there are many important points to each. 
Description of the State of a System.
Each physical system is associated with a (topologically) separable complex Hilbert space with inner product ⟨"φ"|"ψ"⟩. Rays (that is, subspaces of "complex" dimension 1) in are associated with quantum states of the system. 
In other words, quantum states can be identified with equivalence classes of vectors of length 1 in , where two vectors represent the same state if they differ only by a phase factor. "Separability" is a mathematically convenient hypothesis, with the physical interpretation that countably many observations are enough to uniquely determine the state. "A quantum mechanical state is a "ray" in projective Hilbert space, not a "vector". Many textbooks fail to make this distinction, which could be partly a result of the fact that the Schrödinger equation itself involves Hilbert-space "vectors", with the result that the imprecise use of "state vector" rather than "ray" is very difficult to avoid."
The Hilbert space of a composite system is the Hilbert space tensor product of the state spaces associated with the component systems (for instance, J. M. Jauch, "Foundations of quantum mechanics", section 11.7). For a non-relativistic system consisting of a finite number of distinguishable particles, the component systems are the individual particles.
Description of Physical Quantities.
Physical observables are represented by Hermitian matrices on . Since these operators are Hermitian, the measurement is always a real value. If the spectrum of the observable is discrete, then the possible results are "quantized".
Measurement of Physical Quantities.
By spectral theory, we can associate a probability measure to the values of in any state . We can also show that the possible values of the observable in any state must belong to the spectrum of . The expectation value (in the sense of probability theory) of the observable for the system in state represented by the unit vector ∈ "H" is formula_1.
In the special case has only discrete spectrum, the possible outcomes of measuring are its eigenvalues. More precisely, if we represent the state in the basis formed by the eigenvectors of , then the square of the modulus of the component attached to a given eigenvector is the probability of observing its corresponding eigenvalue.
More generally, a state can be represented by a so-called density operator, which is a trace class, nonnegative self-adjoint operator normalized to be of trace 1. The expected value of in the state is formula_2.
Effect of Measurement on the State.
When a measurement is performed, only one result is obtained (according to some interpretations of quantum mechanics). This is modeled mathematically as the processing of additional information from the measurement, confining the probabilities of an immediate second measurement of the same observable. In the case of a discrete, non-degenerate spectrum, two sequential measurements of the same observable will always give the same value assuming the second immediately follows the first. Therefore the state vector must change as a result of measurement, and "collapse" onto the eigensubspace associated with the eigenvalue measured. &lt;/math&gt;
 |width = 50%
 |align = center
 |qalign = center
}}If is the orthogonal projector onto the one-dimensional subspace of spanned by , then formula_3.
Time Evolution of a System.
Though it is possible to derive the Schrödinger equation, which describes how a state vector evolves in time, most texts assert the equation as a postulate. Common derivations include using the DeBroglie hypothesis or path integrals. 
Other Implications of the Postulates.
One can in this formalism state Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and prove it as a theorem, although the exact historical sequence of events, concerning who derived what and under which framework, is the subject of historical investigations outside the scope of this article.
Furthermore, to the postulates of quantum mechanics one should also add basic statements on the properties of spin and Pauli's exclusion principle, see below.
Pictures of dynamics.
The time evolution of the state is given by a differentiable function from the real numbers , representing instants of time, to the Hilbert space of system states. This map is characterized by a differential equation as follows:
If denotes the state of the system at any one time , the following Schrödinger equation holds:
where is a densely defined self-adjoint operator, called the system Hamiltonian, is the imaginary unit and is the reduced Planck constant. As an observable, corresponds to the total energy of the system.
Alternatively, by Stone's theorem one can state that there is a strongly continuous one-parameter unitary map : such that
for all times . The existence of a self-adjoint Hamiltonian such that
is a consequence of Stone's theorem on one-parameter unitary groups. It is assumed that does not depend on time and that the perturbation starts at ; otherwise one must use the Dyson series, formally written as 
where formula_7 is Dyson's time-ordering symbol.
(This symbol permutes a product of noncommuting operators of the form 
into the uniquely determined re-ordered expression 
The result is a causal chain, the primary "cause" in the past on the utmost r.h.s., and finally the present "effect" on the utmost l.h.s. .)
It is then easily checked that the expected values of all observables are the same in both pictures 
and that the time-dependent Heisenberg operators satisfy
which is true for time-dependent . Notice the commutator expression is purely formal when one of the operators is unbounded. One would specify a representation for the expression to make sense of it.
The interaction picture does not always exist, though. In interacting quantum field theories, Haag's theorem states that the interaction picture does not exist. This is because the Hamiltonian cannot be split into a free and an interacting part within a superselection sector. Moreover, even if in the Schrödinger picture the Hamiltonian does not depend on time, e.g. , in the interaction picture it does, at least, if does not commute with , since 

