
Fictional representations of Mars have been popular for over a century. Interest in Mars has been stimulated by the planet's dramatic red color, by early scientific speculations that its surface conditions might be capable of supporting life, and by the possibility that Mars could be colonized by humans in the future. Almost as popular as stories about Mars are stories about Martians engaging in activity (frequently invasions) away from their home planet.
In the 20th century, actual spaceflights to the planet Mars, including seminal events such as the first artificial object to impact the surface of Mars in 1971, and then later the first landing of "the first mechanized device to successfully operate on Mars" in 1976 (in the Viking program by the United States), inspired a great deal of interest in Mars-related fiction. Exploration of the planet has continued in the 21st century on to the present day.
Mars in fiction before Mariner.
The following works of fiction deal with the planet itself, with any assumed Martian civilization as part of its planetary landscape. Mars has been seen as the perfect distance away from Earth to create the idea of a different life, as this allowed for early works to fuel the minds of what Mars could hold. The ideas of Mars as science fiction would first start with Giovanni Schiaparelli in 1877. The ideas of Mars will grow and change with new information changing the way Mars would be seen in the science fiction world.
Novels and short stories.
First ventures.
Several early modern writers, including Athanasius Kircher (1602–1680) and Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772), hypothesized contact with Mars. Early science fiction about Mars often involved the first voyages to the planet, sometimes as an invasion force, more often for the purposes of exploration.
Living on Mars.
By the 1930s, stories about reaching Mars had become somewhat trite and the focus shifted to Mars as an alien landscape. In the following stories, human contact and basic exploration had taken place sometime in the past; Mars is a setting rather than a goal.
Mars in fiction after Mariner.
Novels and short stories.
Mariner 4 in July 1965 found that Mars—contrary to expectations—is heavily cratered, with a very thin atmosphere. No canals were found; while scientists did not believe that Mars was a moist planet, the lack of surface water surprised them. Science fiction had so influenced real explorations of the planet, however—Carl Sagan was among the many fans who became scientists—that after Mariner 9 in 1971–1972, craters were named after Wells, Burroughs, and other authors. The Mariner and Viking space probes confirmed that the Martian environment is extremely hostile to life. By the 1970s, the ideas of canals and ancient civilizations had to be abandoned.
Authors soon began writing stories based on the new Mars (frequently treating it as a desert planet). Most of these works feature humans struggling to tame the planet, and some of them refer to terraforming (using technology to transform a planet's environment to be Earthlike).
A common theme, particularly among American writers, is that of a Martian colony fighting for independence from Earth. It appeared already in Heinlein's "Red Planet" and is a major plot element in Greg Bear's "Moving Mars" and Kim Stanley Robinson's "Mars" trilogy. It is also part of the plot of the movie "Total Recall" and the television series "Babylon 5". Many video games also use this concept, such as the "Red Faction" and "Zone of the Enders" series, and "". A historical rebellion of Mars against Earth is also mentioned in the "Star Trek" series of novels, which are not considered canon.
In the decades following Mariner and Apollo, the once-popular subgenre of realistic stories about a first expedition to Mars fell out of fashion, possibly due to the failure of the Apollo Program to continue on to Mars. The early 1990s saw a revival and re-envisioning of realistic novels about Mars expeditions. Early novels in this renaissance were Jack Williamson's novel "Beachhead" and Ben Bova's novel "Mars" (both 1992), which envisioned large-scale expeditions to Mars according to the thinking of the 1990s. These were followed by Gregory Benford's "The Martian Race" (1999), Geoffrey A. Landis's "Mars Crossing" (2000), and Robert Zubrin's "First Landing" (2002), which took as their starting points the smaller and more focused expedition strategies evolved in the late 1990s, mostly building on the concepts of Mars Direct.
Nostalgic Mars fiction.
Several post-Mariner works are homages to the older phase of Mars fiction, circumventing the scientific picture of a dry and lifeless Mars with an unbreathable atmosphere through such science fiction generic staples as positing its future terraforming, or creating alternate history versions of Mars, where Burroughs' Barsoom, Bradbury's "Martian Chronicles" or "The War of the Worlds" are literal truth.
Nostalgia for the older Mars also frequently appears in comics and role-playing games, particularly of the steampunk genre:
Theme Parks.
 is a simulator ride at Walt Disney World Resort's Epcot theme park about astronauts training in a flight simulation and on a mission to Mars. Along the way, riders experience changes in G-Force, cryosleep, and a meteor shower.
Secondary references to Mars.
In film and television.
In the following works of fiction, the Martian setting is of secondary importance to the work as a whole.
Doctor Who.
The "Doctor Who" television series has Mars as the uninhabitable homeworld of the Ice Warriors, a recurring adversary of the Second and Third Doctors from 1967 to 1974. In "Pyramids of Mars" (1975), the Fourth Doctor defeats Sutekh, last of the Osirians, who had been imprisoned for his crimes beneath a pyramid, with a signal to keep him paralyzed sent from a Martian pyramid. In "The Waters of Mars" (2009), an episode set on the planet itself, the Tenth Doctor implies that the Ice Warriors have become extinct. (This episode also introduces a viral, water-borne Martian named the Flood.) The episode is set in 2059, and implies that the first human colony on Mars will arrive in 2057, two years before the episode is set (as told in dialogue).
Martians in fiction.
The Martian is a favorite character of classical science fiction; he was frequently found away from his home planet, often invading Earth, but sometimes simply a lonely character representing alienness from his surroundings. Martians, other than human beings transplanted to Mars, became rare in fiction after Mariner, except in exercises of deliberate nostalgia – more frequently in some genres, such as comics and animation, than in written literature.

