
The is the oldest extant collection of Japanese (poetry in Classical Japanese), compiled sometime after AD 759 during the Nara period. The anthology is one of the most revered of Japan's poetic compilations. The compiler, or the last in a series of compilers, is today widely believed to be Ōtomo no Yakamochi, although numerous other theories have been proposed. The chronologically last datable poem in the collection is from AD 759 ( 4516). It contains many poems from a much earlier period, with the bulk of the collection representing the period between AD 600 and 759. The precise significance of the title is not known with certainty.
The contains 20 volumes and more than 4,500 poems, and is divided into three genres: , songs at banquets and trips; , songs about love between men and women; and songs to mourn the death of people. These songs written by people of various statuses, such as the Emperor, aristocrats, junior officials, soldiers ( songs), street performers, peasants, and folk songs (Eastern songs). There are more than 2,100 poems of unknown author.
The collection is divided into 20 parts or books; this number was followed in most later collections. The collection contains 265 (long poems), 4,207 (short poems), one ' (short connecting poem), one (a poem in the form 5-7-5-7-7-7; named for the poems inscribed on the Buddha's footprints at Yakushi-ji in Nara), four (Chinese poems), and 22 Chinese prose passages. Unlike later collections, such as the , there is no preface.
The is widely regarded as being a particularly unique Japanese work, though its contained poems and passages did not differ starkly from its contemporaneous (for Yakamochi's time) scholarly standard of Chinese literature and poetics; many entries of the have a continental tone, earlier poems having Confucian or Taoist themes and later poems reflecting on Buddhist teachings. However, the is considered singular, even in comparison with later works, in choosing primarily Ancient Japanese themes, extolling Shintō virtues of and virility (). In addition, the language of many entries of the exerts a powerful sentimental appeal to readers:
[T]his early collection has something of the freshness of dawn. [...] There are irregularities not tolerated later, such as hypometric lines; there are evocative place names and ; and there are evocative exclamations such as , whose appeal is genuine even if incommunicable. In other words, the collection contains the appeal of an art at its pristine source with a romantic sense of venerable age and therefore of an ideal order since lost.
Name.
The literal translation of the kanji that make up the title () is "ten thousand — leaves — collection".
The principal interpretations of this name, according to the 20th century scholar , are:
Of these, supporters of the first interpretation can be further divided into:
Furthermore, supporters of the second interpretation of the name can be divided into:
The third interpretation of the name - that it refers to a poetry collection that uses a large quantity of paper - was proposed by Yūkichi Takeda in his , but Takeda also accepted the second interpretation; his theory that the title refers to the large volume of paper used in the collection has also not gained much traction among other scholars.
Periodization.
The collection is customarily divided into four periods. The earliest dates to prehistoric or legendary pasts, from the time of Emperor Yūryaku (  – ) to those of the little documented Emperor Yōmei (r. 585–587), Saimei (r. 594–661), and finally Tenji (r. 668–671) during the Taika Reforms and the time of Fujiwara no Kamatari (614–669). The second period covers the end of the 7th century, coinciding with the popularity of Kakinomoto no Hitomaro, one of Japan's greatest poets. The third period spans 700 – and covers the works of such poets as Yamabe no Akahito, Ōtomo no Tabito and Yamanoue no Okura. The fourth period spans 730–760 and includes the work of the last great poet of this collection, the compiler Ōtomo no Yakamochi himself, who not only wrote many original poems but also edited, updated and refashioned an unknown number of ancient poems.
Poets.
The vast majority of the poems of the were composed over a period of roughly a century, with scholars assigning the major poets of the collection to one or another of the four "periods" discussed above. Princess Nukata's poetry is included in that of the first period (645–672), while the second period (673–701) is represented by the poetry of Kakinomoto no Hitomaro, generally regarded as the greatest of poets and one of the most important poets in Japanese history. The third period (702–729) includes the poems of Takechi no Kurohito, whom Donald Keene called "[t]he only new poet of importance" of the early part of this period, when Fujiwara no Fuhito promoted the composition of (poetry in classical Chinese). Other "third period" poets include: Yamabe no Akahito, a poet who was once paired with Hitomaro but whose reputation has suffered in modern times; Takahashi no Mushimaro, one of the last great poets, who recorded a number of Japanese legends such as that of Ura no Shimako; and Kasa no Kanamura, a high-ranking courtier who also composed but not as well as Hitomaro or Mushimaro. But the most prominent and important poets of the third period were Ōtomo no Tabito, Yakamochi's father and the head of a poetic circle in the Dazaifu, and Tabito's friend Yamanoue no Okura, possibly an immigrant from the Korean kingdom of Paekche, whose poetry is highly idiosyncratic in both its language and subject matter and has been highly praised in modern times. Yakamochi himself was a poet of the fourth period (730–759), and according to Keene he "dominated" this period. He composed the last dated poem of the anthology in 759.
Linguistic significance.
In addition to its artistic merits the is important for using one of the earliest Japanese writing systems, the cumbersome . Though it was not the first use of this writing system, which was also used in the earlier (712), it was influential enough to give the writing system its name: "the of the ". This system uses Chinese characters in a variety of functions: their usual logographic sense; to represent Japanese syllables phonetically; and sometimes in a combination of these functions. The use of Chinese characters to represent Japanese syllables was in fact the genesis of the modern syllabic kana writing systems, being simplified forms () or fragments () of the .
The collection, particularly volumes 14 and 20, is also highly valued by historical linguists for the information it provides on early Old Japanese dialects.
Translations.
Julius Klaproth produced some early, severely flawed translations of poetry. Donald Keene explained in a preface to the Nihon Gakujutsu Shinkō Kai edition of the :
In 1940, Columbia University Press published a translation created by a committee of Japanese scholars and revised by the English poet, Ralph Hodgson. This translation was accepted in the Japanese Translation Series of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
In premodern Japan, officials used wooden slips or tablets of various sizes, known as , for recording memoranda, simple correspondence, and official dispatches. Three that have been excavated contain text from the . A excavated from an archaeological site in Kizugawa, Kyoto, contains the first 11 characters of poem 2205 in volume 10, written in . It is dated between 750 and 780, and its size is . Inspection with an infrared camera revealed other characters, suggesting that the was used for writing practice. Another , excavated in 1997 from the Miyamachi archaeological site in Kōka, Shiga, contains poem 3807 in volume 16. It is dated to the middle of the 8th century, and is wide by thick. Lastly, a excavated at the Ishigami archaeological site in Asuka, Nara, contains the first 14 characters of poem 1391, in volume 7, written in . Its size is , and it is dated to the late 7th century, making it the oldest of the three.
Plant species cited.
More than 150 species of grasses and trees are mentioned in approximately 1,500 entries of the . A is a botanical garden that attempts to contain every species and variety of plant mentioned in the anthology. There are dozens of these gardens around Japan. The first opened in Kasuga Shrine in 1932.

