
May is the fifth month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars and the third of seven months to have a length of 31 days.
May is a month of spring in the Northern Hemisphere and autumn in the Southern Hemisphere. Therefore, May in the Southern Hemisphere is the seasonal equivalent of November in the Northern Hemisphere and vice versa. Late May typically marks the start of the summer vacation season in the United States (Memorial Day) and Canada (Victoria Day) that ends on Labor Day, the first Monday of September.
May (in Latin, "Maius") was named for the Greek Goddess Maia, who was identified with the Roman era goddess of fertility, Bona Dea, whose festival was held in May. Conversely, the Roman poet Ovid provides a second etymology, in which he says that the month of May is named for the "maiores," Latin for "elders," and that the following month (June) is named for the "iuniores," or "young people" ("Fasti VI.88").
Mayovka, in the context of the late Russian Empire, was a picnic in the countryside or in a park in the early days of May, hence the name. Eventually, "mayovka" (specifically, "proletarian mayovka") came to mean an illegal celebration of May 1 by revolutionary public, typically presented as an innocent picnic.
Special devotions to the Virgin Mary take place in May. See May devotions to the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Eta Aquariids meteor shower appears in May. It is visible from about April 21 to about May 20 each year with peak activity on or around May 6. The Arietids shower from May 22 – July 2, and peaks on June 7. The Virginids also shower at various dates in May.
Ancient Roman observances.
Under the calendar of ancient Rome, the festival of Bona Dea fell on May 1, Argei fell on May 14 or May 15, Agonalia fell on May 21, and Ambarvalia on May 29. Floralia was held April 27 during the Republican era, or April 28 on the Julian calendar, and lasted until May 3. Lemuria (festival) fell on 9,11, and 13 May under the Julian calendar. The College of Aesculapius and Hygia celebrated two festivals of Rosalia (festival), one on May 11 and one on May 22. Rosalia was also celebrated at Pergamon on May 24–26. A military Rosalia festival, Rosaliae signorum, also occurred on May 31. Ludi Fabarici was celebrated on May 29 – June 1. Mercury would receive a sacrifice on the Ides of May (May 15). Tubilustrium took place on May 23 as well as in March. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.
May observances.
Non-Gregorian observances, 2020.
"(All Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)"
Movable observances, 2020.
Movable Western Christian observances, 2020 dates.
Sunday after Divine Mercy Sunday: May 5 
Monday and Tuesday in the week following the third Sunday of Easter: May 6–7 
Fourth Sunday after Easter: May 12 
Fourth Friday after Easter: May 17 
Third Sunday of May: May 19 
Sunday preceding the Rogation days: May 26 
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday preceding Feast of the Ascension: May 27–29
39 days after Easter: May 30 
Movable Eastern Christian observances, 2020 dates.
Wednesday after Pascha: May 1
Thursday after Pascha: May 2 
Friday after Pascha: May 3 
Saturday after Pascha: May 4 
8th day after Pascha: May 5 
2nd Tuesday of Pascha, or 2nd Monday of Pascha, depending on region: May 6 or May 7 
2nd Sunday following Pascha: May 12 
4th Sunday of Pascha: May 26 
Wednesday after the Sunday of the Paralytic: May 29

