
The Noble Eightfold Path (Pali: ; Sanskrit: ) is an early summary of the path of Buddhist practices leading to liberation from samsara, the painful cycle of rebirth, in the form of nirvana.
The Eightfold Path consists of eight practices: right view, right resolve, right speech, right conduct, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right "samadhi" ('meditative absorption or union'). In early Buddhism, these practices started with understanding that the body-mind works in a corrupted way (right view), followed by entering the Buddhist path of self-observance, self-restraint, and cultivating kindness and compassion; and culminating in "dhyana" or "samadhi", which reinforces these practices for the development of the body-mind. In later Buddhism, insight ("prajñā") became the central soteriological instrument, leading to a different concept and structure of the path, in which the "goal" of the Buddhist path came to be specified as ending ignorance and rebirth.
The Noble Eightfold Path is one of the principal teachings of Buddhism, taught to lead to "Arhatship". In the Theravada tradition, this path is also summarized as "sila" (morality), "samadhi" (meditation) and "prajna" (insight). In Mahayana Buddhism, this path is contrasted with the Bodhisattva path, which is believed to go beyond "Arhatship" to full Buddhahood.
In Buddhist symbolism, the Noble Eightfold Path is often represented by means of the dharma wheel (dharmachakra), in which its eight spokes represent the eight elements of the path.
Etymology and nomenclature.
The Pali term "" () is typically translated in English as "Noble Eightfold Path". This translation is a convention started by the early translators of Buddhist texts into English, just like "ariya sacca" is translated as Four Noble Truths. However, the phrase does not mean the path is noble, rather that the path is ( meaning 'enlightened, noble, precious people'). The term "magga" (Sanskrit: "mārga") means "path", while "aṭṭhaṅgika" (Sanskrit: "aṣṭāṅga") means "eightfold". Thus, an alternate rendering of "ariya aṭṭhaṅgika magga" is "eightfold path of the noble ones", or "eightfold Aryan Path".
All eight elements of the Path begin with the word "samyañc" (in Sanskrit) or "sammā" (in Pāli) which means "right, proper, as it ought to be, best". The Buddhist texts contrast "samma" with its opposite "miccha".
The Eightfold Path.
Origin.
According to Indologist Tilmann Vetter, the description of the Buddhist path may initially have been as simple as the term "the middle way". In time, this short description was elaborated, resulting in the description of the eightfold path. Tilmann Vetter and historian Rod Bucknell both note that longer descriptions of "the path" can be found in the early texts, which can be condensed into the eightfold path.
The Eight Divisions.
The eight Buddhist practices in the Noble Eightfold Path are:
Liberation.
Following the Noble Eightfold Path leads to liberation in the form of nirvana:
Threefold division.
The Noble Eightfold Path is sometimes divided into three basic divisions, as follows:
This order is a later development, when discriminating insight ("prajna") became central to Buddhist soteriology, and came to be regarded as the culmination of the Buddhist path. Yet, Majjhima Nikaya 117, "Mahācattārīsaka Sutta", describes the first seven practices as requisites for right samadhi. According to Vetter, this may have been the original soteriological practice in early Buddhism.
The "Moral virtues" (Sanskrit: "śīla", Pāli: "sīla") group consists of three paths: right speech, right action and right livelihood. The word "śīla", though translated by English writers as linked to "morals or ethics", states Bhikkhu Bodhi, is in ancient and medieval Buddhist commentary tradition closer to the concept of discipline and disposition that "leads to harmony at several levels – social, psychological, karmic and contemplative". Such harmony creates an environment to pursue the meditative steps in the Noble Eightfold Path by reducing social disorder, preventing inner conflict that result from transgressions, favoring future karma-triggered movement through better rebirths, and purifying the mind.
The meditation group ("samadhi") of the path progresses from moral restraints to training the mind. Right effort and mindfulness calm the mind-body complex, releasing unwholesome states and habitual patterns and encouraging the development of wholesome states and non-automatic responses, the "bojjhagā" (seven factors of awakening). The practice of "dhyana" reinforces these developments, leading to "upekkha" (equanimity) and mindfulness. According to the Theravada commentarial tradition and the contemporary Vipassana movement, the goal in this group of the Noble Eightfold Path is to develop clarity and insight into the nature of reality – "dukkha", "anicca" and "anatta", discard negative states and dispel "avidya" (ignorance), ultimately attaining "nirvana".
In the threefold division, "prajna" (insight, wisdom) is presented as the culmination of the path, whereas in the eightfold division the path starts with correct knowledge or insight, which is needed to understand why this path should be followed.
Tenfold Path.
In the "Mahācattārīsaka Sutta" which appears in the Chinese and Pali canons, the Buddha explains that cultivation of the noble eightfold path of a learner leads to the development of two further paths of the Arahants, which are right knowledge, or insight ("sammā-ñāṇa"), and right liberation, or release ("sammā-vimutti"). These two factors fall under the category of wisdom ("paññā").
The Noble Eightfold Path, in the Buddhist traditions, is the direct means to nirvana and brings a release from the cycle of life and death in the realms of samsara.
Further explanation.
Right view.
"Right view" (' / ') or "right understanding" states that our actions have consequences, that death is not the end, that our actions and beliefs also have consequences after death, and that the Buddha followed and taught a successful path out of this world and the other world (heaven and underworld or hell). Majjhima Nikaya 117, "Mahācattārīsaka Sutta", a text from the Pāli Canon, describes the first seven practices as requisites of right samadhi, starting with right view:
Later on, right view came to explicitly include "karma" and rebirth, and the importance of the Four Noble Truths, when "insight" became central to Buddhist soteriology. This presentation of right view still plays an essential role in Theravada Buddhism.
The purpose of right view is to clear one's path from confusion, misunderstanding, and deluded thinking. It is a means to gain right understanding of reality. In the interpretation of some Buddhist movements, state Religion Studies scholar George Chryssides and author Margaret Wilkins, right view is non-view: as the enlightened become aware that nothing can be expressed in fixed conceptual terms and rigid, dogmatic clinging to concepts is discarded.
Theravada.
Right View can be further subdivided, states translator Bhikkhu Bodhi, into mundane right view and superior or supramundane right view:
According to Theravada Buddhism, mundane right view is a teaching that is suitable for lay followers, while supramundane right view, which requires a deeper understanding, is suitable for monastics. Mundane and supramundane right view involve accepting the following doctrines of Buddhism:
Right resolve.
Right resolve ("samyak-saṃkalpa" / "sammā-saṅkappa") can also be known as "right thought", "right intention", "right aspiration", or "right motivation". In this factor, the practitioner resolves to leave home, renounce the worldly life and dedicate himself to an ascetic pursuit. In section III.248, the Majjhima Nikaya states,
Like right view, this factor has two levels. At the mundane level, the resolve includes being harmless (ahimsa) and refraining from ill will ("avyabadha") to any being, as this accrues karma and leads to rebirth. At the supramundane level, the factor includes a resolve to consider everything and everyone as impermanent, a source of suffering and without a Self.
Right speech.
Right speech ("samyag-vāc" / "sammā-vācā") in most Buddhist texts is presented as four abstentions, such as in the Pali Canon thus:
Instead of the usual "abstention and refraining from wrong" terminology, a few texts such as the Samaññaphala Sutta and Kevata Sutta in "Digha Nikaya" explain this virtue in an active sense, after stating it in the form of an abstention. For example, Samaññaphala Sutta states that a part of a monk's virtue is that "he abstains from false speech. He speaks the truth, holds to the truth, is firm, reliable, no deceiver of the world." Similarly, the virtue of abstaining from divisive speech is explained as delighting in creating concord. The virtue of abstaining from abusive speech is explained in this Sutta to include affectionate and polite speech that is pleasing to people. The virtue of abstaining from idle chatter is explained as speaking what is connected with the Dhamma goal of his liberation.
In the "Abhaya-raja-kumara Sutta", the Buddha explains the virtue of right speech in different scenarios, based on its truth value, utility value and emotive content. The "Tathagata", states Abhaya Sutta, never speaks anything that is unfactual or factual, untrue or true, disagreeable or agreeable, if that is unbeneficial and unconnected to his goals. Further, adds Abhaya Sutta, the "Tathagata" speaks the factual, the true, if in case it is disagreeable and unendearing, only if it is beneficial to his goals, but with a sense of proper time. Additionally, adds Abhaya Sutta, the "Tathagata", only speaks with a sense of proper time even when what he speaks is the factual, the true, the agreeable, the endearing and what is beneficial to his goals.
The Buddha thus explains right speech in the Pali Canon, according to Ganeri, as never speaking something that is not beneficial; and, only speaking what is true and beneficial, "when the circumstances are right, whether they are welcome or not".
Right action.
Right action ("samyak-karmānta" / "sammā-kammanta") is like right speech, expressed as abstentions but in terms of bodily action. In the Pali Canon, this path factor is stated as:
The prohibition on killing precept in Buddhist scriptures applies to all living beings, states Christopher Gowans, not just human beings. Bhikkhu Bodhi agrees, clarifying that the more accurate rendering of the Pali canon is a prohibition on "taking life of any sentient being", which includes human beings, animals, birds, insects but excludes plants because they are not considered sentient beings. Further, adds Bodhi, this precept refers to "intentional" killing, as well as any form of intentional harming or torturing any sentient being. This moral virtue in early Buddhist texts, both in context of harm or killing of animals and human beings, is similar to "ahimsa" precepts found in the texts particularly of Jainism as well as of Hinduism, and has been a subject of significant debate in various Buddhist traditions.
The prohibition on stealing in the Pali Canon is an abstention from intentionally taking what is not voluntarily offered by the person to whom that property belongs. This includes taking by stealth, by force, by fraud or by deceit. Both the intention and the act matters, as this precept is grounded on the impact on one's karma.
The prohibition on sexual misconduct in the Noble Eightfold Path refers to "not performing sexual acts". This virtue is more generically explained in the "Cunda Kammaraputta Sutta", which teaches that one must abstain from all sensual misconduct, including getting sexually involved with someone unmarried (anyone protected by parents or by guardians or by siblings), and someone married (protected by husband), and someone betrothed to another person, and female convicts or by "dhamma".
For monastics, the abstention from sensual misconduct means strict celibacy while for lay Buddhists this prohibits adultery as well as other forms of sensual misconduct. Later Buddhist texts state that the prohibition on sexual conduct for lay Buddhists includes any sexual involvement with someone married, a girl or woman protected by her parents or relatives, and someone prohibited by "dhamma" conventions (such as relatives, nuns and others).
Right livelihood.
Right livelihood ("samyag-ājīva" / "sammā-ājīva") precept is mentioned in many early Buddhist texts, such as the "Mahācattārīsaka Sutta" in "Majjhima Nikaya" as follows:
The early canonical texts state right livelihood as avoiding and abstaining from wrong livelihood. This virtue is further explained in Buddhist texts, states Vetter, as "living from begging, but not accepting everything and not possessing more than is strictly necessary". For lay Buddhists, states Harvey, this precept requires that the livelihood avoid causing suffering to sentient beings by cheating them, or harming or killing them in any way.
The Anguttara Nikaya III.208, states Harvey, asserts that the right livelihood does not trade in weapons, living beings, meat, alcoholic drink or poison. The same text, in section V.177, asserts that this applies to lay Buddhists. This has meant, states Harvey, that raising and trading cattle livestock for slaughter is a breach of "right livelihood" precept in the Buddhist tradition, and Buddhist countries lack the mass slaughter houses found in Western countries.
Right effort.
Right effort ("samyag-vyāyāma" / "sammā-vāyāma") is preventing the arising of unwholesome states, and the generation of wholesome states. This includes "indriya-samvara", "guarding the sense-doors", restraint of the sense faculties. Right effort is presented in the Pali Canon, such as the "Sacca-vibhanga Sutta", as follows:
The unwholesome states ("akusala") are described in the Buddhist texts, as those relating to thoughts, emotions, intentions, and these include "pancanivarana" (five hindrances) – sensual thoughts, doubts about the path, restlessness, drowsiness, and ill will of any kind. Of these, the Buddhist traditions consider sensual thoughts and ill will needing more right effort. Sensual desire that must be eliminated by effort includes anything related to sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch. This is to be done by restraint of the sense faculties ("indriya-samvara"). Ill will that must be eliminated by effort includes any form of aversion including hatred, anger, resentment towards anything or anyone.
Right mindfulness.
In the vipassana movement, mindfulness ("" / "sammā-sati") is interpreted as "bare attention": never be absent minded, being conscious of what one is doing. While originally, in Yogic practice, "sati" may have meant 
to remember the meditation object, to cultivate a deeply absorbed, secluded state of mind, in the oldest Buddhism it has the meaning of "retention", being mindful of the "dhammas" ("teachings", "elements") that are beneficial to the Buddhist path. According to Frauwallner, mindfulness was a means to prevent the arising of craving, which resulted simply from contact between the senses and their objects. According to Frauwallner this may have been the Buddha's original idea. According to Trainor, mindfulness aids one not to crave and cling to any transitory state or thing, by complete and constant awareness of phenomena as impermanent, suffering and without self.
The "Satipatthana Sutta" describes the contemplation of four domains, namely body, feelings, mind and phenomena. The "Satipatthana Sutta" is regarded by the Vipassana movement as the quintessential text on Buddhist meditation, taking cues from it on "bare attention" and the contemplation on the observed phenomena as "dukkha", "anatta" and "anicca". According to Grzegorz Polak, the four "upassanā" have been misunderstood by the developing Buddhist tradition, including Theravada, to refer to four different foundations. According to Polak, the four "upassanā" do not refer to four different foundations of which one should be aware, but are an alternate description of the "jhanas", describing how the "samskharas" are tranquilized:
Rupert Gethin notes that the contemporary Vipassana movement interprets the "Satipatthana Sutta" as "describing a pure form of insight (vipassanā) meditation" for which "samatha" (calm) and "jhāna" are not necessary. Yet, in pre-sectarian Buddhism, the establishment of mindfulness was placed before the practice of the "jhanas", and associated with the abandonment of the five hindrances and the entry into the first "jhana".
The "dhyāna"-scheme describes mindfulness also as appearing in the third and fourth "dhyana", after initial concentration of the mind. Gombrich and Wynne note that, while the second "jhana" denotes a state of absorption, in the third and fourth "jhana" one comes out of this absorption, being mindfully awareness of objects while being indifferent to them. According to Gombrich, "the later tradition has falsified the jhana by classifying them as the quintessence of the concentrated, calming kind of meditation, ignoring the other – and indeed higher – element.
Right concentration.
"Samadhi".
"Samadhi" ("samyak-samādhi" / "sammā-samādhi") is a common practice in Indian religions. The term "samadhi" derives from the root sam-a-dha, which means 'to collect' or 'bring together', and thus it is often translated as 'concentration' or 'unification of mind'. In the early Buddhist texts, samadhi is also associated with the term "samatha" (calm abiding). In the suttas, samadhi is defined as one-pointedness of mind ("Cittass'ekaggatā"). Buddhagosa defines samadhi as "the centering of consciousness and consciousness concomitants evenly and rightly on a single object...the state in virtue of which consciousness and its concomitants remain evenly and rightly on a single object, undistracted and unscattered."
According to Bhikkhu Bodhi, the right concentration factor is reaching a one-pointedness of mind and unifying all mental factors, but it is not the same as "a gourmet sitting down to a meal, or a soldier on the battlefield" who also experience one-pointed concentration. The difference is that the latter have a one-pointed object in focus with complete awareness directed to that object – the meal or the target, respectively. In contrast, right concentration meditative factor in Buddhism is a state of awareness without any object or subject, and ultimately unto no-thingness and emptiness, as articulated in apophatic discourse. 
Practice.
Bronkhorst notes that neither the Four Noble Truths nor the Noble Eightfold Path discourse provide details of right "samadhi". The explanation is to be found in the Canonical texts of Buddhism, in several "Suttas", such as the following in "Saccavibhanga Sutta":
Bronkhorst has questioned the historicity and chronology of the description of the four "jhanas". Bronkhorst states that this path may be similar to what the Buddha taught, but the details and the form of the description of the "jhanas" in particular, and possibly other factors, is likely the work of later scholasticism. Bronkhorst notes that description of the third "jhana" cannot have been formulated by the Buddha, since it includes the phrase "Noble Ones say", quoting earlier Buddhists, indicating it was formulated by later Buddhists. It is likely that later Buddhist scholars incorporated this, then attributed the details and the path, particularly the insights at the time of liberation, to have been discovered by the Buddha.
Mindfulness.
Although often translated as "concentration", as in the limiting of the attention of the mind on one object, in the fourth "dhyana" "equanimity and mindfulness remain", and the practice of concentration-meditation may well have been incorporated from non-Buddhist traditions. Vetter notes that "samadhi" consists of the four stages of dhyana meditation, but
Gombrich and Wynne note that, while the second "jhana" denotes a state of absorption, in the third and fourth "jhana" one comes out of this absorption, being mindfully awareness of objects while being indifferent to it. According to Gombrich, "the later tradition has falsified the jhana by classifying them as the quintessence of the concentrated, calming kind of meditation, ignoring the other – and indeed higher – element.
Practice.
Order of practice.
Vetter notes that originally the path culminated in the practice of "dhyana/samadhi" as the core soteriological practice. According to the Pali and Chinese canon, the "samadhi" state (right concentration) is dependent on the development of preceding path factors:
quote|The Blessed One said: "Now what, monks, is noble right concentration with its supports and requisite conditions? Any singleness of mind equipped with these seven factorsright view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulnessis called noble right concentration with its supports and requisite conditions.|Maha-cattarisaka Sutta
According to the discourses, right view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness are used as the support and requisite conditions for the practice of right concentration. Understanding of the right view is the preliminary role, and is also the forerunner of the entire Noble Eightfold Path.
According to the modern Theravada monk and scholar Walpola Rahula, the divisions of the noble eightfold path "are to be developed more or less simultaneously, as far as possible according to the capacity of each individual. They are all linked together and each helps the cultivation of the others." Bhikkhu Bodhi explains that these factors are not sequential, but components, and "with a certain degree of progress all eight factors can be present simultaneously, each supporting the others. However, until that point is reached, some sequence in the unfolding of the path is inevitable."
The stage in the Path where there is no more learning in Yogachara Abhidharma, state Buswell and Gimello, is identical to "Nirvana" or "Buddhahood", the ultimate goal in Buddhism.
Gender.
According to Bernard Faure, the ancient and medieval Buddhist texts and traditions, like other religions, were almost always unfavorable or discriminatory against women, in terms of their ability to pursue Noble Eightfold Path, attain Buddhahood and nirvana. This issue of presumptions about the "female religious experience" is found in Indian texts, in translations into non-Indian languages, and in regional non-Indian commentaries written in East Asian kingdoms such as those in China, Japan and southeast Asia. Yet, like other Indian religions, exceptions and veneration of females is found in Indian Buddhist texts, and female Buddhist deities are likewise described in positive terms and with reverence. Nevertheless, females are seen as polluted with menstruation, sexual intercourse, death and childbirth. Rebirth as a woman is seen in the Buddhist texts as a result of part of past karma, and inferior than that of a man.
In some Chinese and Japanese Buddhist texts, the status of female deities are not presented positively, unlike the Indian tradition, states Faure. In the Huangshinu dui Jingang ("Woman Huang explicates the Diamond Sutra"), a woman admonishes her husband about he slaughtering animals, who attacks her gender and her past karma, due to the belief that women are further from enlightenment as the common man is further from enlightenment to a monk, or an ant to a mouse. Similar discriminatory presumptions are found in other Buddhist texts such as the "Blood Bowl Sutra" and the "Longer Sukhāvatīvyūha Sūtra". In the Five Obstacles theory of Buddhism, a woman is required to attain rebirth as a man before she can adequately pursue the Eightfold Path and reach perfect Buddhahood. The "Lotus Sutra" similarly presents the story of the Dragon King's daughter, who desires to achieve perfect enlightenment. The Sutra states that, "Her female organs vanished, the male organs became visible, then she appeared as a bodhisattva".
Gender discrimination worsened during the medieval era in various sub-traditions of Buddhism that independently developed regionally, such as in Japan.
Some scholars, such as Kenneth Doo Young Lee, interpret the "Lotus Sutra" to imply that "women were capable of gaining salvation", either after they first turned into a man, or being reborn in Pure Land realm after following the Path. Peter Harvey lists many "Sutras" that suggest "having faded out the mind-set of a woman and developed the mind-set of a man, he was born in his present male form", and who then proceeds to follow the Path and became an Arahant. Among Mahayana texts, there is a sutra dedicated to the concept of how a person might be born as a woman. The traditional assertion is that women are more prone to harboring feelings of greed, hatred and delusion than a man. The Buddha responds to this assumption by teaching the method of moral development through which a woman can achieve rebirth as a man.
According to Wei-Yi Cheng, the Pali Canon is silent about women's inferior karma, but have statements and stories that mention the Eightfold Path while advocating female subordination. For example, a goddess reborn in the heavenly realm asserts:
Such examples, states Wei-Yi Cheng, include conflating statements about spiritual practice (Eightfold Path, Dhamma) and "obedience to my husband" and "by day and by night I acted to please", thus implying unquestioned obedience of male authority and female subjugation. Such statements are not isolated, but common, such as in section II.13 of the "Petavatthu" which teaches that a woman had to "put away the thoughts of a woman" as she pursued the Path and this merit obtained her a better rebirth; the "Jataka" stories of the Pali Canon have numerous such stories, as do the Chinese Sutta that assert "undesirability of womanhood". Modern Buddhist nuns have applied Buddhist doctrines such as Pratītyasamutpāda to explain their disagreement with women's inferior karma in past lives as implied in "Samyutta Nikaya 13", states Wei-Yi Cheng, while asserting that the Path can be practiced by either gender and "both men and women can become arhant".
Cognitive psychology.
The noble eightfold path has been compared to cognitive psychology, wherein states Gil Fronsdal, the right view factor can be interpreted to mean how one's mind views the world, and how that leads to patterns of thought, intention and actions. In contrast, Peter Randall states that it is the seventh factor or right mindfulness that may be thought in terms of cognitive psychology, wherein the change in thought and behavior are linked.

