
Neural Darwinism is a biological, and more specifically - Darwinian and selectionist, approach to understanding global brain function originally proposed by American biologist, researcher and Nobel-Prize recipient Gerald Maurice Edelman (July 1, 1929 – May 17, 2014). Edelman's 1987 book "Neural Darwinism" introduced the public to the "Theory of Neuronal Group Selection" (TNGS) - which is the core theory underlying Edelman's explanation of global brain function.
Owing to the book title, TNGS is most commonly referred to as the "Theory of Neural Darwinism", although TNGS has roots going back to Edelman and Mountcastle's 1978 book, "The Mindful Brain - Cortical Organization and the Group-selective Theory of Higher Brain Function" - where Edelman's colleague, the American neurophysiologist and anatomist Vernon B. Mountcastle (July 15, 1918 – January 11, 2015), describes the columnar structure of the cortical groups within the neocortex, while Edelman develops his argument for selective processes operating among degenerate primary repertoires of neuronal groups. The development of Neural Darwinism was deeply influenced by Edelman's work in the fields of immunology, embryology, and neuroscience - as well as, his resolute commitment to Charles Darwin and the ingenuity of selection as the unifying foundation and grounding of all biology.
Introduction To Neural Darwinism.
"Neural Darwinism" is really the neural part of the natural philosophical and explanatory framework Edelman employs for much of his work - "Somatic selective systems". "Neural Darwinism" is the backdrop for a comprehensive set of biological hypotheses and theories Edelman, and his team, devised that seek to reconcile vertebrate and mammalian neural morphology, the facts of developmental and evolutionary biology, and the theory of "Natural Selection" into a detailed model of real-time neural and cognitive function that is unmistakably biological - and, built from the bottom-up, utilizing the variation that shows up in nature, rather than trying to explain it away as noise in a distributed system of logic circuits with point-to-point connectivity.
The book, "Neural Darwinism - The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection" (1987), is the first in a trilogy of books that Edelman wrote to delineate the scope and breadth of his ideas on how a "biological theory of consciousness" and animal body plan evolution could be developed in a bottom-up fashion. In accordance with principles of population biology and Darwin's theory of "Natural Selection" - as opposed to the top-down algorithmic and computational approaches that dominated a nascent cognitive psychology at the time.
The other two volumes are "Topobiology - An Introduction to Molecular Embryology" (1988) with its morpho-regulatory hypothesis of animal body plan development and evolutionary diversification via differential expression of cell surface molecules during development; and "The Remembered Present - A Biological Theory of Consciousness" (1989) - a truly novel biological approach to understanding the role and function of "consciousness" and its relation to cognition and behavioral physiology.
Edelman would write four more books for the general lay public, explaining his ideas surrounding how the brain works and consciousness arises from the physical organization of the brain and body - "Bright Air, Brilliant Fire - On the Matter of the Mind" (1992), "A Universe of Consciousness - How Matter Becomes Imagination" (2000) with Giulio Tononi, "Wider Than The Sky - The Phenomenal Gift of Consciousness" (2004), and "Second Nature - Brain Science and Human Knowledge" (2006).
Neural Darwinism is a tour-de-force of biological thought and philosophy as well as raw science; Edelman being well-versed in the history of science, natural philosophy &amp; medicine, as well as, robotics, cybernetics, computing &amp; artificial intelligence. The multidisciplinary aspects of "Neural Darwinism" require a great deal of patience to absorb because of the scope and breadth of what it is trying to encompass. In the course of laying out the case for Neural Darwinism, or more properly TNGS, Edelman delineates a set of innovative concepts for rethinking the problem of nervous system organization and function - all-the-while, demanding a rigorously scientific criteria for building the foundation of a properly Darwinian, and therefore biological, explanation of neural function, perception, cognition, and global brain function that is capable of adequately supporting "Primary and Higher-order consciousness".
Population Thinking - Somatic selective systems.
Edelman was inspired by the successes of fellow Nobel Laureate Frank MacFarlane Burnet and his Clonal selection theory of acquired antigen immunity out of a finite pool of pre-existing lymphocytes within the immune system.
"It is clear from both evolutionary and immunological theory that in facing an unknown future, the fundamental requirement for successful adaption is preexisting diversity" - Gerald M. Edelman (1978)
Edelman elevates the Darwinian foundations of Burnet's theory and generalizes the process to all cell populations of the organism. He also sees the problem as one of recognition and memory from a biological perspective, where the distinction and preservation of self vs. non-self is vital to organismal integrity. Neural Darwinism, as TNGS, is a theory of neuronal group selection that retools the fundamental concepts of Darwin and Burnet's theoretical approach. Neural Darwinism describes the development and evolution of the mammalian brain and its functioning by extending the Darwinian paradigm deep into the body and nervous system.
Antibodies and NCAM - The emerging understanding of somatic selective systems.
Edelman was a medical researcher, physical chemist, immunologist, and aspiring neuroscientist when he was awarded the 1972 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (shared with Rodney Porter of Great Britain). Edelman's part of the prize was for his work revealing the chemical structure of the vertebrate antibody by cleaving the covalent disulfide bridges that join the component chain fragments together, revealing a pair of two-domain light chains and four-domain heavy chains. Subsequent analysis revealed the terminal domains of both chains to be variable domains responsible for antigen recognition.
The work of Porter and Edelman revealed the molecular and genetic foundations underpinning how antibody diversity was generated within the immune system. Their work supported earlier work by Frank MacFarlane Burnet describing how lymphocytes capable of binding to specific foreign antigens are differentially amplified by clonal multiplication following antigen discovery. Edelman would draw tremendous inspiration from the mechano-chemical aspects of antigen/antibody/lymphocyte interaction in relation to recognition of self-nonself; the degenerate population of lymphocytes in their physiological context; and the deep bio-theoretical foundations of this work in Darwinian terms.
After a foray into molecular embryology and neuroscience, in 1975, Edelman and his team went on to isolate the first neural cell-adhesion molecule (N-CAM), one of the many molecules that hold the animal nervous system together. N-CAM turned out to be an important molecule in guiding the development and differentiation of neuronal groups in the nervous system and brain during embryogenesis. To the amazement of Edelman, genetic sequencing revealed that N-CAM was the ancestor of the vertebrate antibody produced in the aftermath of a set of whole genome duplication events at the origin of vertebrates that gave rise to the entire super-family of immunoglobulin genes.
Edelman reasoned that the N-CAM molecule which is used for self-self recognition and adherence between neurons in the nervous system gave rise to their evolutionary descendants, the antibodies, who evolved self-nonself recognition via antigen-adherence at the origins of the vertebrate antibody-based immune system. If clonal selection was the way the immune system worked, perhaps it was ancestral and more general - and, operating in the embryo and nervous system.
Variation in biological systems - Degeneracy, Complexity, Robustness, and Evolvability.
"Degeneracy", and its relationship to variation, is a key concept in "Neural Darwinism". The more we deviate from an ideal form, the more we are tempted to describe the deviations as imperfections. Edelman, on the other hand, explicitly acknowledges the structural and dynamic variability of the nervous system. He likes to contrast the differences between redundancy in an engineered system and degeneracy in a biological system. He proceeds to demonstrate the how the "noise" of the computational and algorithmic approach is actually beneficial to a somatic selective system by providing a wide, and degenerate, array of potential recognition elements.
"Degeneracy, the ability of elements that are structurally different to perform the same function or yield the same output, is a well known characteristic of the genetic code and immune systems. Here, we point out that degeneracy is a ubiquitous biological property and argue that it is a feature of complexity at genetic, cellular, system, and population levels. Furthermore, it is both necessary for, and an inevitable outcome of, natural selection." - Gerald M. Edelman &amp; Joseph A. Gally (2001)
Edelman's argument is that in an engineered system,
To insure the robustness of the solution, critical components are replicated as exact copies. Redundancy provides a fail-safe backup in the event of catastrophic failure of an essential component but it is the same response to the same problem once the substitution has been made.
If the problem is predictable and known ahead of time, redundancy works optimally. But biological systems face an open and unpredictable arena of spacetime events of which they have no foreknowledge of. It is here where redundancy fails - when the designed answer is to the wrong problem...
Variation fuels degeneracy - and degeneracy provides somatic selective systems with more than one way to solve a problem; as well as, the ability to solve more than one problem the same way. This property of degeneracy has the effect of making the system more adaptively robust in the face of unforeseen contingencies, such as when one particular solution fails unexpectedly - there are still other unaffected pathways that can be engaged to result in the comparable final outcome. Early on, Edelman spends considerable time contrasting degeneracy vs. redundancy, bottom-up vs. top-down processes, and selectionist vs. instructionist explanations of biological phenomena.
Rejection of computational models, codes, and point-to-point wiring.
Edelman was well aware of the earlier debate in immunology between the instructionists, who believed the lymphocytes of the immune system "learned" or was "instructed" about the antigen and then devised a response; and the selectionists, who believed that the lymphocytes "already contained the response" to the antigen within the existing population that was "differentially amplified" within the population upon contact with the antigen. And, he was well aware that the selectionist had the evidence on their side.
Edelman's theoretical approach in "Neural Darwinism" was conceived of in opposition to top-down algorithmic, computational, and instructionist approaches to explaining neural function. Edelman seeks to turn the problems of that paradigm to advantage instead; thereby highlighting the difference between bottom-up processes like we see in biology vis a vis top-down processes like we see in engineering algorithms. He sees neurons as living organisms working in cooperative and competitive ways within their local ecology, not computer chips or logic gates in a larger machine.
Edelman's commitment to the Darwinian underpinnings of biology, his emerging understanding of the evolutionary relationships between the two molecules he had worked with, and his background in immunology lead him to become increasingly critical and dissatisfied with attempts to describe the operation of the nervous system and brain in computational or algorithmic terms.
Edelman explicitly rejects computational approaches to explaining biology as non-biological. He amasses an array of arguments against the concept of computation or logical circuits based upon codes; and point-to-point connectivity, showing how inconsistent the concepts are with the actual architecture of the nervous system. Edelman acknowledges that there is a conservation of phylogenetic structure, but what some would call noise, he would call natural variation and degeneracy.
"One conclusion we can draw (...) is that, while there are close similarities in certain regions, there are no absolutely specific point-to-point connections in the brain. The microscopic variability of the brain at the finest ramifications of its neurons is enormous, making each brain unique. These observations provide a fundamental challenge to models of the brain based on instruction or computation." - Gerald M. Edelman (1998)
He gradually began to understand that the problematic and annoying "noise" of the computational "circuit-logic" paradigm could be reinterpreted from a population biology perspective - where that variation in the "signal" or architecture was actually the engine of ingenuity and robustness from a selectionist perspective.
Population Thinking - From the bottom up.
Darwin's theory of Natural Selection put population biology at the very center of biology, but distinguished it from the other sciences. Edelman points out that population thinking freed biologists from the formalism of Platonic Essentialism, or typology from on high that other sciences relied upon. For Edelman, "population thinking states that evolution produces classes of living forms from the bottom up by gradual selective processess over eons of time." He points out that biology is somewhat unique in its particular "mode of thought",
Edelman lists the following primary features of a somatic selective system:
Selective systems can take many forms, not only at the inter-organismal level, but within organismal structures that are constructed of "sub"-organisms, i.e. cells and cell populations within a multicellular organism, or organelles within an cells... enzymatic metabolism within the biochemistry.
These kind of systems operate in terms of response amplification under real-time circumstances, where there is a population of potential response networks from which a particular response network is selected and strengthened, thereby differentially amplifying its response to similar future events.
Population Biology - Individuals, groups, and the somatic evolution of a distributed population.
Among other things, Neural Darwinism posits that the evolution and behavior of cell populations in the body of an organism, operating over the lifetime of the organism, are determined by the rules of natural selection operating in the local cellular and physiological context. Just as the development and evolution of cooperative and competitive interactions between populations of organisms in the ecology are governed by the rules of natural selection - for cell populations in the body, the body is their ecology and their interactions within that context is still governed by the principles of population biology and natural selection.
Very few, if any, neurons in the vertebrate nervous system act solo. Most individual neurons undergo somatic selection during embryogenesis and ultimately find themselves a member of a neuronal group, array, or ensemble, whether that be in the form of ganglia, nuclei, or laminae. Like organisms in the environment, neurons are born into a population of other cells and find themselves members of a community or group.
Edelman describes a neuronal group as "a collection of similar or variant types, ranging in number from hundreds to thousands, that are closely connected in their intrinsic circuitry and whose mutual dynamic interaction may be further enhanced by increaseses in synaptic efficacy." Groups are defined by the relative strengths and interactivity of group members amongst themselves via intrinsic connections; and, a concerted output along extrinsic connections to other neuronal groups.
Somatic Selective Memory systems.
At the end of "Bright Air, Brilliant Fire", Edelman lists the evolutionary emergence of four distinct types of biological memory that are based upon somatic selection that have arisen within vertebrates:
Recognition links cognition to memory and serves as the basis for evolutionary learning in a somatic system.
""Each memory reflects a system property within a somatic selection system. And each property serves a different function based upon the evolution of the appropriate neuroanatomical structure. These higher-order systems are selective and are based on the responses to environmental novelty of populations of neuronal groups arranged in maps. They are recognition systems." - Gerald M. Edelman (1992)"
Evolutionary Topobiology - The cellular, genetic, epigenetic, and group mechanisms of pattern formation.
Pattern formation is at the heart of embryology - and, the origin of animals marks the birth of embryology. One of the great problems that evolutionary developmental biologists have been trying to solve since the time of Darwin is - how unicellular organisms living in a colonial environment made the transition from cells being selected as individuals within the population of cells - to, the entire multicellular colony being selected as an individual, an event that marks the transition to multicellularity. This threshold has been achieved at least three times in evolution - plants, animals, and fungi, each with its own historically contingent outcome.
We can rephrase the problem for animals as - how unicellular organisms living in a colonial environment made the transition from cells being selected as intracellularly-digesting individuals within the population of cells - to, the entire multicellular colony being selected as an extracellularly-digesting individual, an event that marks the transitional endpoint in the origin of metazoans as a firmly estabilished biolgical form of organization. 
For animals with their unicellular ancestral roots in the relatively sophisticated choanoflagellate protozoa, the problem becomes one of understanding how they made the transition to Porifera, Cnidaria, Bilateria, Deuterostome, and Chordate - and, onward to vertebrates where Edelman will pick up the story. Edelman investigates the problem of pattern formation from the perspective of evolutionary developmental morphology, but enters the game with the vertebrates.
Edelman doesn't specifically get into the evolutionary tracing of lineages, but rather focuses on the mechanical details of embryo formation while keeping the evolution of the body in mind. He is looking for a mechanistically continuous process by which variant versions of a physiological viable and adaptive body plan could be formed over evolutionary time. His concepts of the mechanochemistry of CAMs and SAMs being genetically and epigenetically choreographed to bring about topobiological pattern formation in the embryo are essential components in understanding how he envisages how the evolution of a body plan might occur over geological times, as well as in real-time.
Completing Darwin's program - The problems of evolutionary and developmental morphology.
In "Topobiology", Edelman reflects upon Darwin's search for the connections between morphology and embryology in his theory of Natural Selection. He identifies four unresolved problems in the development and evolution of morphology that Darwin thought important:
Later, In "Bright Air, Brilliant Fire", Edelman describes what he calls "Darwin's Program" for obtaining a complete understanding of the rules of behavior and form in evolutionary biology. He identifies four necessary requirements:
It's important to notice that these requirements are not directly stated in terms of genes, but heredity instead. This is understandable considering that Darwin himself appears to not be directly aware of the importance Mendelian genetics. Things had changed by the early 1900s, the Neodarwinian Synthesis had unified the population biology of Mendelian Inheritance with Darwinian Natural Selection. By the 1940s, the theories had been shown to be mutually consistent and coherent with paleontology and comparative morphology. The theory came to be known as the "Modern Synthesis" on the basis of the title of the 1942 book "Evolution: The Modern Synthesis" by Julian Huxley (June 22, 1887 – February 14, 1975). 
The Modern Synthesis really took off with the discovery of the structural basis of heredity in the form of DNA. The Modern Synthesis was greatly accelerated and expanded with the rise of the genomic sciences, molecular biology, as well as, advances in computational techniques and the power to model population dynamics. But, for evolutionary-developmental biologists, there was something very important missing... - and, that was the incorporation of one of the founding branches of biology, "embryology". A clear understanding of the pathway from zygote to embryo was the missing component of the synthesis. Edelman, and his team, were positioned in time and space to fully capitalize on these technical developments, and scientific challenges, as his research progressed.
Edelman reinterprets the goals of "Darwin's program" in terms of the modern understanding about genes, molecular biology, and other sciences that weren't available to Darwin. One of his goals is reconciling the relationships between genes in a population (genome) which lie in the germ line (sperm, egg, and fertilized egg); and the individuals in a population who develop degenerate phenotypes (soma) as they transform from an embryo into an adult who will eventually procreate if adaptive. Selection acts on phenotypes (soma), but evolution occurs within the species genome (germ). 
Edelman follows the work of the great American geneticist and evolutionary biologist Richard Lewontin (1929–present), drawing particular inspiration from his 1974 book, "The Genetic Basis of Evolutionary Change". Edelman, like Lewontin, seeks a complete description of the transformations (T) that take us from:
Lewontin's exploration of these transformations between genomic and phenotypic spaces was in terms of key selection pressures that sculpt the organism over geological evolutionary time scales; but, Edelmans approach is more mechanical, and in the here and now - focusing on the genetically-constrained mechano-chemistry of the selection processes in the embryo over developmental time.
The evolution of individuality.
In 1987, the same year Edelman published "Neural Darwinism", Yale professor Leo W. Buss published his own work, "The Evolution of Individuality" (1987). Buss was thinking about the early stages of the same problem that Edelman was seeking to work out on the vertebrate and mammalian level with regard to the developmental question. The blurb on the back of his book summarizes Buss' take on the problem elegantly:
"Leo Buss expounds a general theory of development through a simple hierarchical extension of the synthetic theory of evolution. He perceives innovations in development to have evolved in ancestral organisms where the germ line was not closed to genetic variation arising during the course of ontogeny. Variants that favor both the proliferation of the cell lineage and the organism harboring them were sequentially incorporated in an increasingly sophisticated epigenetic program. In contrast, variants that favor the replication of cell lineage at the expense of the individual were eliminated and ultimately favored the fixation of variants that limited the production and/or expression of subsequent variation, creating a stable developmental system."
This vision of the evolution of the developmental process, by Buss, is very compatible with the concepts of "Neural Darwinism" and "Somatic Selection" as envisaged by Edelman - each authors work informing the others in an indirect manner. Perhaps, even offering the opportunity to develop a clear understanding of how a bottom up process can lead to the diversity and complexity we see around us in the animal kingdom.
Animal cells - Divide or differentiate, but not both at the same time.
Animal cells only have one microtubule organizing center (MTOC) per cell, and a choice in how it can be used at any given time. The MTOC can either nucleate microtubules to be used to differentiate the cytoskeletal architecture; or, the MTOC can be used to form the meiotic and mitotic spindles that participate in the separation of the chromosomes during cell division. In order for an animal cell to divide, it must retract it's cytoskeleton and become ameoboid, so that it can redirect it's MTOC to the process of division instead. This restriction has interesting consequences for animal evolution as a multicellular organism.
The cytoskeleton is comprised of a variety of microfilaments, intermediate filaments and microtubules - all of which can undergo dynamic assembly and/or disassembly to control fiber length during morphological tranformations of the cells overall shape. It is the mutual requirement of the microtubules in cytoskeletal differentiation and cellular replication that sets the constraints on animal body plan organization. It appears that this very constraint may have been the necessary requirement to direct the bifurcation of the early animal bodyplan into germ and soma.
The Germ and the Soma - Meiotic and Mitotic pathways.
Buss traces his ideas of somatic selection in early animals to the great nineteenth century biologist August Weismann (January 17, 1834 – November 5, 1914) and this theory of germ plasm, where the cells of the body follow one of two distinct paths: "Germ" or "Soma". 
In animals the meiotic pathway is the path of the "germ" line - and, leads to the production of genetically recombinant individuals in the next generation. The mitotic pathway is clonal and the destiny of the "Soma". Within the developing animal these cells in the mitotic pathway will experience increasing inhibitory mechanisms that are the result of somatic selection and limit their reproductivity and instead force them to differentiate into a specialized cell form.
The "Soma" will provided a protective cordon through the environment for the "germ" line to successfully reproduce without degradation from environmental damage, which has been borne by the "Soma" instead.
Senescence and the purpose of the Soma.
"Individuals" are selected, "species" evolve. That is the relationship between the individual phenotype exemplified by the soma; the species genome, or gene pool, which resides in the "germ line"; and, what we mean by the word "evolution" in a biological context.
Ultimately, Buss explains, in early animals, as the early animal body plan complexifies, the openness of the germ line to developmental variation in the course of embryogenesis becomes more refractory; and, the germ line becomes sequestered. At this point the "soma", or body, has essentially become a protective transport mechanism for the germ line through the environment until such time as the germ line can consummate a successful sexual recombination and progeny.
Cells of the soma are under pressure to differentiate, specialize, and forgo reproduction. To achieve this, cellular populations exert mutual reproductivity-inhibiting mechanisms on the neighboring cells in their community - and instead, direct them along a specialization trajectory that is the result of somatic selection during the developmental sequence.
Essentially the body is a spaceship for the germline, where the cells of the body forgo their ancient impetus towards reproduction via binary fission, and instead differentiate and participate in the communal activity of protecting the species germ line from environmental damage and mutation - thereby, protecting the species genome from deleterious mutations to the course of developmental ontogeny.
For animals, the "soma", or body is meant to be discarded - it is for the good of the species integrity. The accumulation of physical damage, and environmental mutation, is discarded with the "soma"; and, the genome of the species is protected from the potential destabilizing effects it would have had on the developmental program already established. Most unicellular organisms can be killed, but they don't die of old age - they divide. For metazoans, the soma is the origin of mortality - and, the inevitability of death in animals. This is the cost of being a true metazoan.
The old age senescence of the soma is adaptive - and, meant to prevent the introduction of mutation into the species gene pool. These cell have sacrificed themselves for the good of the species, which is carried in the germ line. It is no surprise that pre-programmed cell death and apoptosis occur within the developmental ontogeny, selection is for the benefit of the germ line and any benefit to the soma is incidental.
Interestingly, cells that disengage from the inhibitory mechanisms on reproduction within the soma, can become cancerous as they resort to their ancestral pattern of reproductive fission with a complete disregard to the physiological and adaptive integrity of the body they are embedded within.
The problem of animal origins and immunity.
Both Edelman and Buss are building on a foundation that was laid down almost hundred years earlier. Although the recapitulist interpretations of embryology championed by Ernst Haeckel dominated the discussion of biological origins at the time, there were dissenters of all kinds. Not the least of these was Elie Metchinikoff. "Mechanistic continuity and physiological viability" are the necessary requirements Metchnikoff demanded of each stage of an embryological and evolutionary transition. 
Metchnikoff's accidental discovery of the white blood cell in a star fish, and his research into phagocytosis, lead him to the concept of a system of innate host immunity in animals; where the white blood cells, phagocytes, patrol the body looking for foreign invaders and damaged cells to consume. He reasoned that they were a cell lineage that had retained their ancestral role of distinguishing self from non-self in early animal colonies - and, therefore represented a primitive state for animals. Metchinikoff challenged the orthodoxy of Haeckels "Gastraea theory" of animal origins on the basis that it was "not" mechanistically continuous and physiologically viable in all its intermediate stages between unicellularity and multicellularity. He argued that there must have been a preceding historical period leading to the extracellualrly digesting "gastraea", and that was the colonial ancestors of the mesoderm-derived amoeboid phagocytes which exhibit the ancestral mode of intracellular digestion through phagocytosis - phagocytella.
The Morphoregulator Hypothesis - The mechano-chemistry of CAMs &amp; SAMs in spacetime.
Edelman's isolation of NCAM lead him to theorize on the role of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) and substrate adhesion molecules (SAMs) in the formation of the animal bodyplan in both realtime and over evolutionary time. "Topobiology" is primarily dedicated to this issue that is foundational to the understanding of "Neural Darwinism" and the formation of the primary repertoire of TNGS.
In his "Regulator Hypothesis", Edelman hypothesizes about the role of cell surface molecules in embryogenesis and how shifting expression of these molecules in time and place within the embryo can guide the development of pattern. Later, he will expand the hypothesis into the "Morpho-regulatory Hypothesis". He describes the embryonic cell populations as either organized as mesenchyme or epetheilia.
Edelman characterizes the two population types as follows:
He envisages a CAM, and SAM, driven cycle where cell populations transform back and forth between mesenchyme and epethelia. via "epithelial-mesenchymal transformations", as the development of the embryo proceeds through to the fetal stage. The expression of the CAMs and SAMs is under genetic control, but the distribution of these molecules on the cell membrane and extracellular matrix is historically contingent upon epigenetic events, serving as one of the primary bases for generating pre-existing diversity within the nervous system and other tissues.
The evolution of neurons.
Neuronal ignorance and the primary processes of development.
In "Neural Darwinism", Edelman addresses the problem of neuronal ignorance, and the fact that most neurons know nothing about the outside world as we conceptualize it - they experience the world at the cell-membrane and, that is a local affair that occurs well within the environment of the body.
Neurons live a life that is driven by what Edelman describes as the "primary processes of cellular development". He breaks them into two categories, Driving Processes and Regulatory Processes:
Driving Processes -
Regulatory Processes -
Neurons can communicate as organisms do, but within the range of their experience and capacity. Any perception of reality on the scale that we know it is a collectively embodied endeavor on their part, but no individual neuron is ever aware of or dedicated to anything more than their survival within the ecological and physiological environment they find themselves in. Collective action is adaptive because it serves the physiological well-being of the organism, but neurons as individuals do not cognize the world the way we do, their world is communicated to them at the level of the cell membrane and its surface molecules.
The role of "Neurotransmitters" and the synaptic cleft.
Many of the biogenic amines (5-HT,H,DA,E,NE) identified as "neurotransmitters", were identified as such because they were first discovered in the nervous systems of animals. Subsequent research has revealed that some of these substances have a murky evolutionary history that is much deeper than the origin of animals. Many so called "Neurotransmitters" predate animals, therefore neurons as well.
The great evolutionary question is how the receptors for these substances came to be localized on the cell membrane to eventually emerge as the synaptic cleft in the neurons of animals. This transition must have occurred at the origin of the Cnidarian phyla when the first neurons and nervous system emerged in the form of a radial nerve net.
Edelman proposes that a diversification of neurotranmitter substances in vertebrates added additional potential to regulate a highly variant neural architecture.
"...instead of dividing input into only two classes - excitatory and inhibitory - and thinking of neuronal operations in Boolean terms, we might rather consider a kind of 'transmitter logic' in which each transmitter (in association with its post-synaptic partners) can lead to characteristic modifications of synapses receiving only certain other transmitters and located only on certain other parts of the dendritic tree." - Gerald M. Edelman (1987)
Neurotransmitter and receptor combinations provide an additional level of degeneracy at each synaptic cleft within each neuron, at the pre- and post-synaptic points of contact on the neuronal cell body, axon, dendritic tree of itself and its contacts.
Receptors, signal transduction and second-messenger systems.
Most cell-membrane bound receptors facing the exterior of the cell are coupled to second-messenger systems that communicate with the enzyme complexes, organelles, metabolism, and genome in the interior of the cell.
The main signal transduction pathways in cells are:
The antiquity of "Neurotransmitter"-like substances.
The antiquity of the amino acid and purinergic transmitters is obvious, but the biogenic amines are the mainstay of the global neurotransmitter fountains embedded in the integrating reticulum of the reticular activating system - and, the deeper history of the ancient role of the biogenic amines is little discussed, explored, or known about.
Many "neurotransmitters" have been found to be utilized by single celled organisms, usually for the coordination of growth and metabolism in colonial contexts. These molecules were connected to biological mechanisms of communication between cells long before animals and nervous systems existed - and, a clear understanding of their roles in this context sheds light on their modern role in animal nervous systems.
The problems of vertebrate evolution.
Vertebrates undergo several important innovative bursts that organize their anatomy and nervous systems. These seem to be intimately linked to genome duplication events, a somato-visceral fusion of life-stages, and some major adaptive reorganizations.
From the beginning, the neural crest has been the great innovation of vertebrates; a fourth germ layer from which, the tissues that weld the somatic and visceral divisions are derived. Following the history of these tissues tells the story of vertebrate evolution and neural organization.
The vertebrate as a dual organism - Hedonic and Sensorimotor.
Edelman envisages a vertebrate nervous system organized into a somatic division which is fundamentally sensorimotor in structure and dedicated to the ecology - and, a visceral division, characterized by an enteric nerve net, dedicated to the hedonic needs of the organism. The enteric nervous system (ENS) of the visceral division and its autonomic connections to the somatic division, as well as a number of subcortical structures within the somatic division, will provide the vital adaptive hedonic feedback necessary for the CNS and neocortex to form the vital "perceptual categorizations" and "postural" motor routines that are meaningful to it.
""In many regards the vertebrate organism, whether fish or mammal, is a well-knit unit structure. But in other respects there seems to be a somewhat imperfect welding, functionally and structurally, of two somewhat distinct beings: (1) an external, "somatic," animal, including most of the flesh and bone of our body, with a well organized nervous system and sense organs, in charge, so to speak, of "external affairs," and (2) an internal, "visceral," animal, basically consisting of the digestive tract and its appendages, which, to a considerable degree, conducts its own affairs, and over which the somatic animal exerts but incomplete control."" - Alfred Sherwood Romer (1972)
Edelman's anatomical view is similar to that of the great American vertebrate anatomist and paleontologist Alfred Sherwood Romer (December 28, 1894 – November 5, 1973) and his vision of the vertebrate as a dual animal. Interestingly, although Edelman makes no references to the Polyvagal Theory of Stephen Porges (1945–present), Porges work on the phyletic origins of the autonomic nervous system and its CNS nuclei in the brainstem adds an additional layer of nuance to Romer's picture of vertebrate organization with respect to mammals. Porges postulates that the neuroanatomical basis of a social-engagement system was constructed out of a recently remodeled and myelinated-pharyngeal arch system and its brainstem nuclei, a newly emergent neocortex with inhibitory outflow, and the myelinated division of the parasympathetic nervous system.
Edelman describes the neuroanatomy of the somatic division, the central nervous system (CNS), as organized into a structure that is made up of nerve tracts as well as nuclear, laminar and columnar cell populations - and in contact with the external world via the primary sensory sheets and muscle ensembles. Since Edelman focuses primarily on the operation of the neocortex, his hedonic feedback systems emanate from the world of subcortical structures that have roots deep in the brainstem and connections to the visceral body via the autonomic nervous system.
Communication between the two divisions can occur via the autonomic, endocrine, and immune systems but, the key neural integration point is where the reticular network of the brainstem ties together the autonomic and cranial nuclei of the pharyngeal arch system, the general and special tracts of the peripheral nervous system, and the global neurotransmitter fountains that diffusely project upward to the midbrain, thalamus, and cortex, as well as back down the spinal column. This is the link between somatic and visceral divisions that allows the visceral nervous system to act as a mechanism of selection in the recruitment of neuronal groups whose configurations are adapative such that the hedonic needs of the visceral body are being met.
The challenges of the jawless vertebrates.
The agnata represent the primitive state.
The innovations of jawed vertebrates.
It appears that a second genome duplication event may have facilitated the emergence of jawed vertebrates by providing another duplicate set of genes that could be redirected to new purpose without disruption of earlier established genetic and epigenetic developmental somatic programs.
Key innovations, all of which are key components in the fight or flight system:
The problems of amniote and mammalian evolution.
Many of the most important modifications of the vertebrate body plan in mammals concerns the adaption to land. There are several key features of significant importance:
Neural Anatomy and Enactive Embodiment.
Neuronal groups, topomaps, re-entrant ensembles.
Edelman's concept of what a "neuronal group" is - is influenced by the work of his colleague Vernon Mountcastle, and his vision of the cortical column as a functional unit in a distributed system within the neocortex. He describes "neuronal groups" as a population of cells with "intrinsic connections" that bind them into a functional unit - and, "extrinsic connections" that bind them to other neuronal groups within a highly distributed system: "The main unit of function and selection in the higher brain is a group of cells (consisting of perhaps 50-10,000 neurons) connected in a large variety of ways..."
Edelman presents a view where collections of neuronal groups are organized into topobiological maps of the body. This means they may map the sensory sheets, motor-ensembles, or other neuronal groups that they connect to. For sensory sheets, the distal neurons in the pathway sends out ramifications that bifurcate or diverge as they move deeper into the nervous system and distribute their input to multiple levels and regions, linking a small number of sensory cells to a much larger number of neuronal groups deeper in the nervous system. Somewhat analogously, the motor neurons within the motor ensembles at the distal end of the motor pathway receive inputs from neuronal groups within a wide number of distributed regions and levels of the nervous system.
A re-entrant ensemble results for the selection of a subset of topomaps and associated pathways that are simultaneously engaged and sustained to instigate postural changes in response to sensory feedback in accordance with the hedonic needs of the organism.
Reciprocal inhibition, canalization, and stress-response buffering.
In a selective system, oftentimes differential amplification occurs via inhibition of competitors. In the nervous system most excititory pathways synapse with inhibitory neurons - and, most often the activation of a specific pathway involves suppressing or inhibiting the expression of other pathways that would require the use of the same structural components or resources.
Reciprocal inhibition allows the system to collapse to a solution, rather than calculate a solution. Under the conditions of canalization, this process can result in a set of reflexes that are adaptive under normal circumstances, but under stress conditions the inhibition can be released to reveal the latent variation that was outside the canalized pathway, offering potentially novel and on occasion adaptive, behavioral responses to novel stresses. There is an enormous amount of latent variation or "buffering" in a canalized system that allows the system to respond to stress rapidly.
The reservoir of latent inhibited networks just outside the conditioned range of behavior, is a reservoir of creativity and resourcefulness for the nervous system. There are pathways and networks of neuronal groups capable of exploring new possibilities and solutions outside the range of prior conditioning that lay latent and below threshold activation expect under extraordinary circumstances.
Cognizing self and non-self - Topobiological neural maps &amp; posture.
Edelman's background made him well aware that the most fundamental distinction an organism can make is between self and non-self. He considers the key problem for cells, organized into mesencyhme and epithelia within a multicellular animal, is how to organize themselves such that they can act as a unified whole, or "self" within a broader ecology when survival necessitates it. With his understanding of duality of vertebrate anatomical architecture, he focuses on how the nervous system might give rise to a unified sense of "self" from its structure and dynamic interactions with the environment.
Edelman describes the central nervous system as a set of topological maps of the body periphery and muscle groups that become increasingly plastic as we move up from the base of the spine all the way to the midbrain and thalamus. From there the thalamus maps to the neocortex via the Thalamo-cortical system, a key point of focus for Edelman's TNGS theory.
The maps are able maintain their topological integrity due the way traveling nerve bundles in development largely preserve their spatial relationships they migrate to contact other cell groups in the body. The maps are formed in development via the neural transmission from the periphery, generated by sensory stimulation from the environment in conjunction with internally generated periodic oscillations, entraining downstream neurons and propagating inward to developing regions of the central nervous system. Topobiological patterning resulfts from stimulating the release of enhancing and/or inhibiting growth factors and synaptic reinforcement amongst the cells and neurons involved - thereby, consolidating and stabilizing the maps.
A second critical component in establishing a sense of self vs. non-self is the motor-ensembles, along with their proprioceptors, which underlie the posture of the organism. Cognition has three primary components - sensorysheet derived stimulation, motor-ensemble driven postural feedback, and the hedonic evaluation of the situation. Posture is how the organism orients itself in the environment based upon its hedonic state and the ecological context. Posture is mediated by the motor ensembles responding to the hedonic evaluation of perceptual experience, and re-sensed via proprioception. These motor ensembles are topobiologically mapped, just as the sensory maps of the periphery - indeed, the sensory maps are intimately tied to the motor groups that move them.
These systems of embodied interactive topobiological maps and postural motor ensembles interact at all levels of the CNS, are increasingly plastic as we move up the CNS to the cortex, and are ultimately tied to hedonic pathways emanating from the subcortical and brainstem centers that receive feedback from the viscera and play an important role in an evolving sense of "self" coalescing around a hedonic center as the system adapts to everything else that is non-self.
Building a theory of global brain function.
""Man has throughout the ages been seeking something beyond himself, beyond material welfare - something we call truth or God or reality, a timeless state - something that cannot be disturbed by circumstances, by thought or by human corruption." - Jiddu Krishnamurti (1969)"
Edelman's work recognizes the limitations we are faced with in the quest that the enigmatic 20th century writer, speaker, and philosopher Jiddu Krishnamurti (May 11. 1895 – February 17. 1986) speaks of. Krishnamurti would say that knowledge is limited or bound by the range of one's experience. Beyond that range, the universe is mysterious but, at any moment, it could surprise us with something new and novel. Indeed, he would also intimate that what we do know, constrains the way we perceive the world - and, we can become trapped by the finiteness of our own experience and knowledge-base. He would point out that there is a difference between thought and awareness. Thought is comparing things as they are to what you believe they should be. Awareness is seeing things as they are - unlabeled by preconceptions and expectations. As a mystic, he seeks "Freedom from the Known" in his quest to know the universal.
For Edelman, adaptive pattern recognition will bypass these grand conceptions and focus on survival using the known in the face of the unknown - for the time-being. The "known" of humans is primarily linguistic in nature. We are story-telling creatures with a long pre-literate history of ancestor knowledge transmission in the oral tradition within culture. But, linguistic thought lies on prelinguistic substrate that is deep and well developed in mammals prior to the advent of language. Language is both constrained by prelinguistic cognitive structures - and, enjoys a limited access to them in their entirety at this moment in time.
Since language is the province of consciousness, Edelman will divide the problem in two - 1) Primary consciousness as the process of creating a unitary "Remembered Present" which assimilates and accommodates novelty into learning from earlier experience but has no sense of past or future, only a self-centered sense of events in spacetime; and, 2) "Higher-order" consciousness where the brain becomes massively reentrant and developes a narrative sense of past, present, and future that is reflective, historical, and cultural in nature.
Necessary criteria for a selectionist theory of higher brain function.
Edelman's first theoretical contribution to Neural Darwinism came in 1978, when he proposed his "Group Selection and Phasic Reentrant Signalling: A Theory of Higher Brain Function". Edelman lays out five necessary requirements that a biological theory of higher brain function must satisfy.
Perceptual Categorization.
For Edelman, the world of signals that the sensory sheets experience is effectively infinite and unknowable ahead of time. The nervous system starts off knowing practically nothing about the world other than the phylogenetically selected ethological patterns of behavior that have emerged over time within a given species. Edelman describes the world of sensory signals emanating from an "object" that hit the sensory sheets as polymorphous - and, of ambiguous importance until selection in the context of hedonic feedback elevates them to prominence in the neural processing of the environment.
"An individual animal endowed with a richly structured brain must also adapt without instruction to a complex environment to form perceptual categorizations or an internal taxonomy governing its further responses to its world" - Gerald M. Edelman (1987)
Edelman defines "Perceptual Categorization" as "the selective discrimination of an object or event from other objects or events for adaptive purposes".
The problem of animal nervous systems - finite structures in an infinite world.
In Edelman's view, animal nervous systems operate fundamentally in terms of adaptive pattern recognition rather than logic. They are finite structures with a finite resolution on reality and their experience. They cannot know an effectively infinite reality in its totality, therefore they do not attempt to do so because it would be impossibly costly in terms of time and resources.
Animal nervous systems are not logic devices, nor are they truth-seeking devices. Instead, animal nervous systems evolved a strategy of "adaptive pattern recognition" that allows for the environment to be cognitively sampled and approximated, or "imagined", based upon the finite nature of its experience.
The nervous system is capable of constructing a seemingly infinite variety of cognitively degenerate approximations that are of greater or lesser degree of correspondence to the actual features of reality that they are experiencing.
They are not primarily interested in those models with the closest correspondence to reality, but rather select those models meeting their primary adaptive and/or hedonic needs at any particular point in time and space.
The limits of cognitive models - language is a late-comer.
In "The Remembered Present", Edelman reasons that the neuroanatomical structures giving rise to emotive precept, thought, category, concept, narrative, and ecological cognitive modeling was well established in mammals prior to humans developing language.
"The conceptual categorization that emerges prior to language is obviously richer than perceptual categorization but is also enormously enhanced by language. Nonetheless, concepts are about the world..." - Gerald M. Edelman (1989)
Edelman's observes that although language is an enhancer on cognition and behavior, is also a late-comer in the evolutionary scheme of things - and, that much of cognition is mediated by a neuronal group architecture consisting of a nested hierarchy of reentrant sensorimotor and higher-order topobiological maps, operating in conjunction with hedonic feedback systems, that is capable of carrying out a pre-linguistic "state of being aware of things in the world - of having mental images in the present."
Biological consciousness - The problem of novelty and recognition.
One specific goal of the theory is to demonstrate how the subject of "consciousness" can approached scientifically and in a manner that is consistent with the underlying principles of Darwinian biology. "Neural Darwinism" ties the process of "consciousness" directly to the cognitive architecture of the organism and the need to assimilate previously un-encountered phenomena into the organisms repertoire of adaptive responses.
Edelman seems to take two approaches to the issue, consciousness as a state, and consciousness as a process. He seeks to ground the process in the anatomy and physiology of the organism - specifically to neuronal groups within the nervous system and how they perform the task of "perceptual categorization" from an initially nebulous wave of world signals being received by the sensory sheets in conjunction with hedonic feedback systems when confronted with novelty.
Consciousness as a state.
Edelman acknowledges that human "consciousness" appears to have evolved a broader range of potential than our animal cousins and he takes time to divide the process of "consciousness" into "Primary" and "Higher-order" so that he can address the uniqueness of linguistic consciousness vis a vis "the remembered present" of mammalian consciousness more broadly.
"I have made a distinction, which I believe is a fundamental one, between primary consciousness and higher-order consciousness. Primary consciousness is the state of being aware of things in the world - of having mental images in the present. But it is not accompanied by any sense of a person with a past and future. ...higher-order conciousness involves the recognition by a thinking subject of his or her own acts or affections. It exhibits direct awareness - the non-inferential or immediate awareness of mental episodes without the involvement of the sense organs or receptors." - Gerald M. Edelman (1992)
Edelman associates primary consciousness with a state of awareness that is driven by hedonic need, but has little or no explicit sense of an autobiographical self. This type of consciousness is an awareness that is entirely in the moment.
Consciousness as a process.
In addition to being a state of awareness, in Edelman's view "consciousness" operates as a sub-component process of "cognition" more broadly. "Consciousness" functions to deal with novel aspects of our experience which have not been previously encountered and adapted to. Edelman reasons that "consciousness" is dedicated to the assimilation of novelty and attending to hedonically-salient ecological con-specifics.
Once the novelty has been adapted to and assimilated as habituated reflex, or the basic hedonic need met, the novelty ceases to be novel - and, "consciousness" is freed up to attend to further novel aspects of the organisms perceptual experience and the ongoing adaption to its environment.
By restraining the definition of "consciousness", as a process, in this manner, the term acquires a very specific, finite, and biologically definable form as a psycho-physiological process with an underlying anatomical architecture and evolutionary history, allowing it to be scientifically tested, categorized, and examined. This in turn, should allow "conscious states" to be characterized as the anatomical-physiological configuration associated with the assimilation of novelty at any particular point in time. If we consider "conscious states" as occurring in "phases", then we can consider the neurodynamics occurring within time frames instead.
The thalamo-cortical system is of particular importance since the neocortex is thought to play an important role in higher order consciousness - and, this is the primary sensory gateway that connects the neocortex to the rest of the sub-cortical system. The connections from the paleo- and archi-cortex provide important input as well. The neocortex itself, will send out a shower of inhibitory outflow that modulates and refines sub-cortical motor actions as it travels down the central nervous system to the distal neuro-muscular motor groups along each tract. In ""The Remembered Present" and later Edelman argues that thalamocortical and corticocortical reentrant signaling are critical to generating and maintaining conscious states in mammals.
TNGS - The theory of neuronal group selection.
Edelman's motivation for developing the "Theory of Neuronal Group Selection" (TNGS) was to resolve "a number of apparent inconsistencies in our knowledge of the development, anatomy, and physiological function of the central nervous system." A pressing issue for Edelman was explaining "perceptual categorization" without reference to a central observing "homunculus" or "assuming that the world is prearranged in an informational fashion."
To free himself of the demands, requirements, and contradictions of information processing model; Edelman proposes that "perceptual catergorization" operates by the selection of neuronal groups organized into variant networks that are differentially amplified of their responses in conjunction with hedonic feedback over the course of experience, from within a massive population of neuronal groups being confronted by a chaotic array of sensory input of differing degrees of significance and relevance to the organism.
Edelman outright rejects the notion of a "homunculus", describing it as a "close cousin of the developmental electrician and the neural decoder", artifacts of the observer-centralized top-down design logic of information processing approaches. Edelman properly points out that "it is probably a safe guess that most neurobiologists would view the homunculus as well as dualist solutions (Popper and Eccles 1981) to the problems of subjective report as being beyond scientific consideration."
Organization of the TNGS theory.
"Neural Darwinism" organizes the explanation of TNGS into three parts - "Somatic Selection", "Epigenetic Mechanisms", and "Global Functions". The first two parts are concerned with how variation emerges through the interaction of genetic and epigenetic events at the cellular level in response to events occurring at the level of the developing animal nervous system. The third part attempts to build a temporally coherent model of globally unitary cognitive function and behavior that emerges from the bottom up through the interactions of the neuronal groups in real-time.
Edelman organized key ideas of the TNGS theory into three main tenets:
The primary repertoire is formed during the period from the beginning of neurulation to the end of apoptosis. The secondary repertoire extends over the period synaptogenesis and myelination, but will continue to demonstrate developmental plasticity throughout life, albeit in a diminished fashion compared to early development.
The two repertoires deal with the issue of the relationship between genetic and epigenetic processes in determining the overall architecture of the neuroanatomy - seeking to reconcile "Nature", "Nurture", and "variability" in the forming the final phenotype of any individual nervous system.
"A central feature of the theory of neuronal group selection is that the mechanisms leading to the formation of both the primary and secondary repertoire are epigenetic: while bounded by genetic constraints, events occurring at both developmental and experiential stages of selection lead to increases with time in both the heterogeniety and spatial diversity of cells and cellular structures. Such events depend upon the prior occurrence of other events in time courses that are long compared with those of intracellular events, and the cells involved exhibit interactive and cooperative spatial orderings that could not have been stored directly in the genetic code." - Gerald M. Edelman (1987)
There is no point-to-point "wiring" that carries a "neural code" through a computational logic circuit that delivers the result to the brain because
Variation is the inevitable outcome of developmental dynamics.
Reentrant signalling is an attempt to explain how "Coherent temporal correlations of the responses of sensory receptor sheets, motor ensembles, and interacting neuronal groups in different brain regions occur".
Primary repertoire- Developmental selection.
The first tenet of TNGS concerns events that are embryonic and run up to the neonatal period. This part of the theory attempts to account for the unique anatomical diversification of the brain even between genetically identical individuals. The first tenet proposes the development of a primary repertoire of degenerate neuronal groups with diverse anatomical connections are established via the historical contingencies of the primary processes of development. It seeks to provide an explanation of how the diversity of neuronal group phenotypes emerge from the organism's genotype via genetic and epigenetic influences that manifest themselves mechano-chemically at the cell surface and determine connectivity.
Edelman list the following as vital to the formation of the primary repertoire of neuronal groups but, also contributing to their anatomical diversification and variation:
Two key questions with respect to this issue that Edelman is seeking to answer "in terms of developmental genetic and epigenetic events" are:
The neuronal group - Intrinsic and extrinsic connections.
These neuronal groups will be one of the primary units of selection in the formation of the primary repertoire in TNGS.
Secondary repertoire - Experiential selection.
The second tenet of TNGS regards postnatal events that govern the development of a secondary repertoire of synaptic connectivity between higher-order populations of neuronal groups whose formation is driven by behavioral or experiential selection acting on synaptic populations within and between neuronal groups. Edelman's notion of the secondary repertoire heavily borrows from work of Jean-Pierre Changeux, and his associates Philippe Courrège and Antoine Danchin - and, their theory of "Selective Stabilization of Synapses".
Synaptic modification.
Once the basic variegated anatomical structure of the primary repertoire of neuronal groups is laid down, it is more or less fixed. But given the numerous and diverse collection of neuronal group networks, there are bound to be functionally equivalent albeit anatomically non-isomorphic neuronal groups and networks capable of responding to certain sensory input. This creates a competitive environment where neuronal groups proficient in their responses to certain inputs are "differentially amplified" through the enhancement of the synaptic efficacies of the selected neuronal group network. This leads to an increased probability that the same network will respond to similar or identical signals at a future time. This occurs through the strengthening of neuron-to-neuron synapses. These adjustments allow for neural plasticity along a fairly quick timetable.
Reentry.
The third, and final, tenet of TNGS is reentry. Reentrant signalling "is based on the existence of reciprocally connected neural maps." These topobiological maps maintain and coordinate the real-time responses of multiple responding secondary repertoire networks, both unimodal and multimodal - and their reciprocal reentrant connections allow them to "maintain and sustain the spatiotemporal continuity in response to real-world signals."
The last part of the theory attempts to explain how we experience spatiotemporal consistency in our interaction with environmental stimuli. Edelman called it "reentry" and proposes a model of reentrant signaling whereby a disjunctive, multimodal sampling of the same stimulus event correlated in time that make possible sustained physiological entrainment of distributed neuronal groups into temporally stable global behavioral units of action or perception. Put another way, multiple neuronal groups can be used to sample a given stimulus set in parallel and communicate between these disjunctive groups with incurred latency.
The Extended Theory of Neuronal Group Selection - The Dynamic Core Hypothesis.
In the aftermath of his publication of "Neural Darwinism", Edelman continuted to develop and extend his TNGS theory as well as his Regulator Hypothesis. Edelman would deal with the morphological issues in "Topobiology" and begin to extend the TNGS theory in "The Remembered Present". Periodically over the intervening years, Edelman would release a new update on his theory and the progress made. 
In "The Remembered Present", Edelman would observe that the mammalian central nervous system seemed to have two distinct morphologically organized systems - one the limbic and brainstem system which is primarily dedicated to "appetitive, consumatory, and defensive behavior"; The other system is "thalamocortical reentrant system", along with the "primary and secondary sensory areas and association cortex" which are "linked strongly to exteroceptors and is closely and extensively mapped in a polymodal fashion."
In 1993, Edelman released "Bright Air, Brilliant Fire" where he elaborated further on his concepts of the Thalamocortical system and the cortical appendages that integrated memory, and realtime function of the cortex with the subcortical architecture of the mammal. He extends the TNGS theory with his "Dynamic Core Hypothesis".
The Thalamocortical System.
The thalamus is the gateway to the neocortex for all senses except olfactory. The spinothalamic tracts bring sensory information from the periphery to the thalamus, where multimodal sensory information is integrated and triggers the fast response subcortical reflexive motor responses via the amygdala, basal ganglia, hypothalamus and brainstem centers. Simultaneously, each sensory modality is also being sent to the cortex in parallel, for higher-order reflective analysis, multimodal sensorimotor association, and the engagement of the slow modulatory response that will fine-tune the subcortical reflexes.
The Cortical Appendages - The organs of succession.
Edelman realized the limits of his TNGS theory and his attempts at replication automata were inadequate to the task of explaining the realtime sequencing and integration of the neuronal group output of the cortex with the subcortical organization of the organism. "Neither the original theory nor simulated recognition automata deal in satisfactory detail with the successive ordering of events in time mediated by the several major brain components that contribute to memory, particularly as it relates to consciousness." This problem lead him to focus on what he called the "organs of succession"; The Cerebellum, Basal Ganglia, and Hippocampus.
The Neurosciences Institute - Buidling Brain-based Devices.
Despite Edelman's criticism of computational approaches to biology, he has no qualms about applying biology to computation. Edelman's research institute, The Nuerosciences Institute (NSI) in La Jolla, California, has been developing brain-based devices that utilize the conceptions of Neural Darwinism to operate and "program" themselves from the bottom-up.
Darwin III and Nomad.
Darwin III and Nomad were two early versions of brain-based devices that Edelman discusses.
Reception.
An early review of the book "Neural Darwinism" in The New York Review of Books by Israel Rosenfield invited a lively response on the part of the neurosciences community. Edelman's views would be seen as an attack on the dominant paradigm of computational algorithms in cognitive psychology and computational neuroscience - inviting criticism from many corners.
There would be copious complaints about the language difficulty. Some would see Edelman coming across as arrogant, or an interloper into the field of neuroscience, from neighboring molecular biology. There were legitimate arguments raised as to how much experimental and observational data had been gathered in support of the theory at that time. Or, if the theory was even original or not.
But more often, rather than dealing with Edelman's critique of computational approaches, the criticism would be centered around whether Edelman's system was a truly proper Darwinian explanation. Nonetheless, "Neural Darwinism", both the book and the concept, received fairly broad critical acclaim.
One of the most famous critiques of "Neural Darwinism" would be the 1989 critical review by Francis Crick, "Neural Edelmanism". Francis Crick based his criticism on the basis that neuronal groups are instructed by the environment rather than undergoing blind variation. In 1988, the neurophysiologist William Calvin had proposed true replication in the brain, whereas Edelman opposed the idea of true "replicators" in the brain. Stephen Smoliar published another review in 1989.
England, and its neuroscience community, would have to rely on bootleg copies of the book until 1990, but once the book arrive on English shores, the British social commentator and neuroscientist Steven Rose was quick to offer both praise and criticism of its ideas, writing style, presumptions and conclusions. The "New York Times" writer George Johnson published, "Evolution Between the Ears", a critical review of Gerald Edelman's 1992 book "Brilliant Air, Brilliant Fire". In 2014, John Horgan wrote a particular insightful tribute to Gerald Edelman in Scientific American, highlighting both his arrogance, brilliance, and idiosyncratic approach to science.
It has been suggested by Chase Herrmann-Pillath that Friedrich Hayek had earlier proposed a similar idea in his book "The Sensory Order: An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical Psychology", published in 1952. Other leading proponents of a selectionist proposals include Jean-Pierre Changeux (1973, 1985), Daniel Dennett, and Linda B. Smith. Reviews of Edelman's work would continue to be published as his ideas spread.
A recent review by Fernando, Szathmary and Husbands explains why Edelman's Neural Darwinism is not Darwinian because it does not contain units of evolution as defined by John Maynard Smith. It is selectionist in that it satisfies the Price equation, but there is no mechanism in Edelman's theory that explains how information can be transferred between neuronal groups. A recent theory called Evolutionary Neurodynamics being developed by Eors Szathmary and Chrisantha Fernando has proposed several means by which true replication may take place in the brain.
These neuronal models have been extended by Fernando in a later paper. In the most recent model, three plasticity mechanisms i) multiplicative STDP, ii) LTD, and iii) Heterosynaptic competition, are responsible for copying of connectivity patterns from one part of the brain to another. Exactly the same plasticity rules can explain experimental data for how infants do causal learning in the experiments conducted by Alison Gopnik. It has also been shown that by adding Hebbian learning to neuronal replicators the power of neuronal evolutionary computation may actually be greater than natural selection in organisms.

