
The Nation of Islam (NOI) is a religious and political organization founded by Wallace Fard Muhammad in the United States in 1930. Scholars of religion characterise it as a new religious movement and a UFO religion, and while it identifies itself as promoting a form of Islam, its beliefs differ considerably from mainstream Islamic traditions. It operates as a hierarchical and centralized organization based in Chicago.
A black nationalist organization, the NOI focuses attention on African Americans and the African diaspora. It teaches the existence of a succession of mortal gods, each termed Allah and taking the form of a black man. It claims that the first Allah created the earliest humans, the Arabic-speaking, dark-skinned Tribe of Shabazz, who themselves possessed inner divinity and from whom all people of color descend. It maintains that a scientist named Yakub then created the white race; lacking inner divinity, the whites were intrinsically violent and so overthrew the Tribe of Shabazz, becoming globally dominant. The NOI sets itself against white-dominant society, calling for African Americans to be economically self-sufficient and separatist, and campaigning for an independent African American state. A millenarian tradition, it maintains that the current Allah will soon return aboard a spaceship, the "Mother Plane" or "Mother Ship," to wipe out the white race and inaugurate a utopia. Members meet to worship in buildings known as mosques or temples; their beliefs are materialist, rejecting the existence of any spiritual essence or afterlife. Practitioners are expected to live highly disciplined lives, adhering to strict dress codes, specific dietary requirements, and patriarchal gender roles.
Wallace Fard Muhammad established the Nation of Islam in Detroit. He drew on various sources, including Noble Drew Ali's Moorish Science Temple of America, black nationalist trends like Garveyism, and black-oriented forms of Freemasonry. After Fard Muhammad disappeared in 1934, leadership of the NOI was assumed by Elijah Muhammad. He expanded the NOI's teachings and declared that Fard Muhammad was in reality the latest Allah. Attracting growing attention in the late 1950s and 1960s, the NOI's influence expanded through high-profile members such as the boxer Muhammad Ali and the black nationalist activist Malcolm X. Deeming it a threat to domestic security, the Federal Bureau of Investigation worked to undermine the group. Following Elijah Muhammad's death in 1975, his son Warith Deen Mohammed took over the organization, moving it towards Sunni Islam and renaming it the World Community of Islam in the West. Members seeking to retain Elijah Muhammad's teachings re-established the Nation of Islam under Louis Farrakhan's leadership in 1977. Farrakhan has continued to develop the NOI's distinctive beliefs, for instance by drawing connections with Dianetics, and expanded its economic and agricultural operations.
Based in the United States, the Nation of Islam has also established a presence abroad, with membership open to people of color but not whites. In 2007, its membership was estimated to be at 50,000; the Nation has proved particularly successful at attracting converts from prisons. Its critics, including civil rights activists, the Southern Poverty Law Center, and the Anti-Defamation League, have accused it of being a black supremacist hate group that promotes racial prejudice towards white people, anti-semitism, and anti-LGBT rhetoric. Many Muslim critics accuse it of promoting teachings that are not legitimately Islamic.
Definition.
The Nation of Islam is a new religious movement, an African American religion, and a social movement. Scholars of religion have also classified it as a UFO religion, with UFOs featuring in its ideas about the forthcoming end of the world. Although employing the same name, the Nation of Islam has represented two distinct organizations: the first was established by Wallace Fard Muhammad in the 1930s and lasted until 1975, and the second then created by Louis Farrakhan in the late 1970s.
The Nation's beliefs draw heavily on both Christianity and Islam, although the NOI interprets their sacred scriptures in ways different from Christians or mainstream Muslims. Its founder, Wallace Fard Muhammad, drew on both the Bible and the Qur'an, which he interpreted idiosyncratically. Islamic elements to its practices include the use of the Arabic language, prayers five times a day, and the adoption of a flag based on that of Islamic-majority Turkey. 
The Nation of Islam has always seen itself as part of the Islamic world. The NOI's second leader, Elijah Muhammad, stated that "Islam is the natural religion of the Black Nation," and the group is one of several whose members have been called "Black Muslims." A Muslim identity appealed to the NOI in that it offered an alternative to mainstream American culture, which was Christian-dominated. The Nation characterises Christianity as a tool of white supremacy, and claims that, in contrast to Christianity, Islam is a rational and scientific religion.
The NOI has little in common with mainstream forms of Islam. For instance, unlike most forms of Islam, the NOI does not teach that the 6th/7th century Arabian religious leader Muhammad was the final nor the most important messenger of God. Instead, it treats its first two leaders, Fard Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad, as being more important. 
The religion promoted by the Nation has been called "Fardian Islam," and described as "nontraditional Islam," with some commentators regarding it as an unorthodox Islamic sect. From mainstream Islamic perspectives, its teachings are heretical and its theology is "shirk", or blasphemy. Members of mainstream Muslim groups view it as "a religious movement which has selectively adopted some Islamic beliefs and concepts, but which cannot be thought of in any way, as truly Islamic."
The Nation is a highly centralized, hierarchical movement, and has been described as authoritarian. Unlike practitioners of Rastafari, a contemporary of the NOI which shares many of its key concerns, members of the Nation do not exhibit considerable variation in their approach to the religion, displaying a high degree of uniformity and conformity among followers. However, there is no specific holy text produced by the NOI, and its teachings have not remained static, but have changed throughout its history. Over the course of its history it has for instance adopted additional elements from mainstream Islam, and Farrakhan's second Nation also bears some distinct differences from its predecessor.
History.
Background.
Islam had a presence in North America prior to the formation of the United States. African Muslims were among the Spanish expeditions that explored the continent during the early modern period and were also among the many enslaved people transported there via the Atlantic slave trade of the 16th to 19th centuries. It is estimated that, at the time of the American Revolution in the 1760s–80s, approximately 15 percent of enslaved Africans and African Americans in the new United States were Muslim. Although Islam probably died out among the African American community over subsequent generations, the notion that Islam was a religion associated with African Americans would prove influential over the Black Muslim revival of the early 20th century.
The early NOI's theology was informed by various sources, including older forms of black nationalism, Garveyism, the Moorish Science Temple of America, the Jehovah's Witnesses, and Black Freemasonry. The Nation was significantly influenced by Marcus Garvey, a Jamaican-born black nationalist who lived in the U.S. from 1916 to 1927 and who formed the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA); Garvey's economic nationalism, whereby he called for African American economic self-sufficiency and enterprise, was a particular influence.
The Moorish Science Temple, an organization also promoting an idiosyncratic religion that described its teachings as Islam, would also be a key influence on the Nation. This had been established by the North Carolina-born African American Noble Drew Ali in Newark, New Jersey in 1913. Drew Ali claimed that he was the reincarnation of both Jesus and Muhammad, and maintained that African Americans should refer to themselves as "Moorish Americans," reflecting what he believed were their connections to the Islamic Moors of North Africa. The Nation then emerged in the context of the 1930s, when large numbers of African Americans were migrating from southern states to the cities of the north.
Wallace Fard Muhammad.
The Nation of Islam was founded by Wallace Fard Muhammad, who appeared in Detroit in July 1930, when he began preaching his ideas among the city's African American community. Fard Muhammad claimed that he was an Arab from Mecca who had come to the United States on a mission to the African American people, whom he called the "Nation of Islam," to restore them to their original faith. The Nation has since taught that he was born in Mecca on February 26, 1877, the son of a black father and white mother; in their view, he was Allah himself. Outside the Nation, various theories have been proposed as to the true identity of Fard Muhammad. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) later noted that Fard Muhammad's fingerprints matched those of Wallie D. Ford, a white man who had a record of arrests and had served a three-year sentence in San Quentin Prison for drugs charges. Ford had been released in May 1929, a year before the appearance of Fard Muhammad. The NOI reject the identification of Fard Muhammah as Ford, claiming that the FBI forged the fingerprint evidence. Another allegation is that Fard had been a member of the Moorish Science Temple of America, David Ford-el, and had tried to claim its leadership by proclaiming himself to be the reincarnation of founder Noble Drew Ali but failed.
Fard Muhammad's following grew rapidly. Around 7000 to 8000 people attended his meetings, which were held three days a week. He wrote two manuals, the "Secret Ritual of the Nation of Islam" and the "Teaching for the Lost Found Nation of Islam in a Mathematical Way". He also urged his followers to listen to the radio sermons of the Watch Tower Society and Baptist fundamentalists. He established a bureaucratic administration within the Nation, its own system of schools, and the Fruit of Islam paramilitary wing.
In 1931, an African American man named Elijah Poole became a disciple of Fard Muhammad. He had been born to a poor family in Bold Springs, Georgia in 1897; his father was a sharecropper and Baptist preacher. In 1923, Poole and his wife Clara relocated to Detroit, where they settled in the black ghetto of Paradise Valley. There, he joined Garvey's UNIA, and worked in industrial plants before becoming unemployed amid the Great Depression. On joining the Nation of Islam, Fard Muhammad gave Poole the new name of Elijah Karriem.
In 1932 the Detroit Police Department arrested an NOI member for a murder which they claimed was a human sacrifice. This led to headline news which often identified the NOI as a "Voodoo cult". The police then raided the Nation's headquarters and arrested Fard Muhammad. He was soon released; the killer was declared insane. After this incident, Fard Muhammad gave Elijah Poole increasing powers, declaring him Supreme Minister of the Nation and renaming him Elijah Muhammad. In 1933, Elijah Muhammad then set up a new temple on Chicago's South Side. Fard Muhammad was arrested several further times; in September 1933 he was arrested for disorderly conduct in Chicago, which is his last known verified whereabouts. In 1934, Fard Muhammad disappeared without notifying his followers or designating a successor.
Elijah Muhammad's leadership.
With Fard Muhammad gone, Elijah Muhammad took over as head of the Nation. He then claimed that Fard Muhammad had been Allah himself and that he had now returned to his own realm, with Elijah Muhammad remaining on Earth as his messenger. His wife Clara took on the identity of Khadija. Under Elijah Muhammad's leadership, the NOI relocated its headquarters to Chicago. He then spent the following seven years traveling around the United States, mostly along the East Coast, promoting his religion to African Americans.
During the Second World War, many Nation members refused the military draft, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) started monitoring the Nation. FBI informants reported pro-Japanese sentiment being expressed at Nation meetings. In September 1942, the FBI arrested 65 NOI members, including Elijah Muhammad, who was incarcerated for refusing to register for the draft. He was released in August 1946. He lived at a villa named the Palace in Chicago's Hyde Park area, and in winter moved to a large ranch outside Phoenix, Arizona. He also undertook the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca three times, in 1959, 1967, and 1971.
In 1959, the FBI encouraged the media to attack the Nation, hoping to discredit it. It was in this year that a documentary about the group, "The Hate that Hate Produced", was screened. This press criticism backfired, giving the group significant attention and assisting its recruitment. The NOI became a foil for the civil rights movement, which presented the group as evidence for the harmful effect that poor race relations were having in the U.S. In 1963, a schism in the Nation's Temple Number 7 led to the creation of a new group, the Five Percent Nation of Islam.
One of the Nation's most significant members at this time was Malcolm X. Born Malcolm Little, he discovered the Nation while in prison; following his release in 1952 he rose swiftly through its hierarchy. In 1960, he launched the newspaper "Dr Muhammad Speaks", which reached a circulation of over 600,000. In 1963, he became the Nation's first National Representative. Malcolm X went on the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, where he came across white Muslims, an experience that shifted him from his total hostility to white people. In light of these experiences, he became a Sunni Muslim. He began denouncing Elijah Muhammad for his extramarital affairs and accused the Nation of holding back the revolutionary potential of African Americans. In February 1965, Malcolm X was assassinated in New York. The following year, three members of the NOI were convicted of the killing. There was press speculation that the Nation's leaders were complicit, something which damaged the group's reputation.
Another prominent NOI member was the boxer Muhammad Ali. Born Cassius Clay, he encountered the Nation in 1961 and publicly revealed his membership of them in 1964. He faced significant media criticism for this, and in 1967 was de facto banned from professional boxing for refusing to fight in the Vietnam War.
In 1972, the NOI bought the St Constantine Greek Orthodox Church in Chicago and transformed it into their headquarters temple. By 1974, it had either temples of study groups in every U.S. state and the District of Columbia. It had continued to face opposition from the FBI, who engaged in a renewed counterintelligence project to destabilise it from the late 1960s. This included sowing discord between the Nation and the Black Panther Party, encouraging several incidents in which Black Panthers attacked NOI newspaper sellers. The NOI also engaged in recurring conflicts with other Islamic groups that had predominantly black memberships. It argued with Hamaas Abdul Khaalis' Hanafi Muslim group, and in 1973 a group of Nation members killed seven Hanafi Muslims, five of them children. The Nation's leadership denied sanctioning this attack.
Wallace Muhammad and the transition to Sunnism.
In 1975, Elijah Muhammad died and was succeeded by his son, Wallace Muhammad. Wallace Muhammad had had a strained relationship with his father and his father's teachings; while imprisoned in the early 1960s he had moved closer to Sunni Islam and had left the Nation on several occasions during the 1960s and 1970s, having re-joined in 1974. As leader, Wallace Muhammad launched what he called a "Second Resurrection" in the movement. He increasingly aligned the group with Sunnism, rejecting many of the Nation's idiosyncratic teachings, including its claim that Fard was God, that Elijah Muhammad had been a prophet, the Myth of Yakub, and the claims about the Mother Plane. He retained the Nation's themes of black pride, healthy diets, sexual modesty, and economic self-determination. "Temples" were renamed "mosques," while "ministers" were renamed "imams." The FOI was disbanded, with Wallace calling it a "hooligan outfit." Black nationalism was abandoned, and in June 1975 he ended the ban on white people joining the Nation.
In November 1976 the Nation was renamed the World Community of al-Islam in the West, and in April 1978 to the American Muslim Mission. Wallace Muhammad also renamed himself, first to Warith Deen and then to Warithuddin Muhammad. Wallace Muhammad claimed that these changes were in accordance with his father's intentions; he claimed to be in contact with Fard Muhammad, and that the founder had established the NOI's idiosyncratic beliefs as a means of gradually introducing Islamic teachings to African Americans, with the ultimate intention of bringing them to mainstream Sunnism. He claimed that the old Nation idea that the white man was the Devil referred to mental whiteness, a state that is rebelling against Allah, rather than light-skinned people themselves. Most mosques remained with Wallace Muhammad during these reforms but some rejected them, seeking to return to the group's original teachings; small splinter groups emerged in Detroit, Atlanta, and Baltimore. In 1986, Wallace Muhammad disbanded the organization, telling his followers to affiliate instead with their local mosques.
Louis Farrakhan's Revival.
The leading figure in rejecting Wallace Muhammad's reforms was Louis Farrakhan, who with other disaffected members began to re-establish the Nation of Islam in 1977. Born in the Bronx to Caribbean migrants, Farrakhan had been a nightclub singer prior to joining the original Nation in 1955. In 1964 he had become minister of the NOI's Harlem Temple and in 1967 a national representative of Elijah Muhammad. Under Wallace Muhammad's leadership, Farrakhan was relocated to Chicago, widely seen as a demotion.
Farrakhan presented himself as Elijah Muhammad's true successor; his followers described Wallace Muhammad's leadership as "the Fall." Farrakhan's NOI spent the first several years focusing on rebuilding; the Fruit of Islam was re-established. In 1979, Farrakhan established a newspaper, "The Final Call", which by 1994 had a circulation of 500,000. In 1981, Farrakhan's Nation held its first convention, and its membership began to increase rapidly in the mid-1980s. It was able to buy much of the property owned by its predecessor, including the Chicago Palace and the Stoney Island Mosque.
Farrakhan claimed that in 1985, at Tepotzotlán in Mexico, he was teleported aboard the Mother Plane and there was given advice on the future of the Nation. Masonic elements and numerology came to play an important part in Farrakhan's speeches. Farrakhan's Nation expanded its international network, including building links in Africa; particularly strong links were built between Farrakhan and Ghanaian President Jerry Rawlings. Under Farrakhan, the NOI adopted more elements of mainstream Islamic orthopraxy, although not to the extent of Wallace Muhammad.
Although Farrakhan was critical of the heavy use of such themes as sex, violence, and drugs in rap and hip hop music, during the 1980s and 1990s artists influenced by the Nation who were active in these genres played a role in spreading the Nation's message. Farrakhan had grown concern by the growth of gang violence, especially among African American youths, and in 1989 launched his "Stop the Killing" campaign to combat it. He played a key role in getting two of the country's largest gangs, the Bloods and the Crips, to sign a ceasefire in May 1992.
Farrakhan organized the Million Man March in 1995 which united a range of African American groups to protest in Washington DC; it was the largest black demonstration in U.S. history.
In 2010, Farrakhan announced his embrace of Dianetics and has actively encouraged NOI members to undergo auditing from the Church of Scientology. Farrakhan praised L. Ron Hubbard, founder of Dianetics and Scientology, stating that his ideas were "exceedingly valuable to every Caucasian person on this Earth". NOI Sister Charlene Muhammad received the "Dianetics Auditor of the Year" Award 2018.
Beliefs.
Theology.
The sociologist of religion David V. Barrett noted that the Nation's theology is "very distinct" and "extremely detailed." Although the Nation professes commitment to the monotheistic idea of a single God, its discourse refers to multiple gods, resulting in the Nation issuing various conflicting statements about its theology. In the Nation's theology, gods are anthropomorphic, taking human form; a central tenet is that God is a black man. In his 1965 book "Message to the Black Man", Elijah Muhammad wrote that "God is a man and we just cannot make Him other than a man, lest we make Him an inferior one; for man's intelligence has no equal in other than man. His wisdom is infinite; capable of accomplishing anything that His brain can conceive. A spirit is subjected to us and not we to the spirit." 
Elijah Muhammad taught that there is no spiritual realm, and that the material universe is all that there is. The NOI does not teach the existence of an afterlife, and instead focus is placed on living a good life; Elijah Muhamad wrote that "when you are dead, you are DEAD."
In the Nation's teaching, the first God to come into being consciously created himself in the form of a black man. The NOI also believes that history can be divided into distinct cycles, each of which is ruled by a new God who takes over from his predecessor. The Nation teaches that none of these gods are immortal, but all die, at which a new God will take their place. These gods have differing abilities and degrees of power. The Nation regards its founder, Fard Muhammad, as the latest of these Gods, or "God in person". They believe that he is the first God to have the same powers as the inaugural God, namely the ability to return the universe to its primordial darkness and then recreate it, for he has developed the divine capacity innate to black people to the maximum degree.
There is thus a recurring idea that God is man and man is God, that God has a presence inside human individuals. It teaches that the black race, in its natural state, is divine; collectively, the black race is God, or a "nation of Gods"; Elijah Muhammad once said that "all Muslims are Allahs." According to its teachings, "knowledge of self" is key for black people to realize their inner divinity. The NOI thus teaches that by following its teachings, one can recognize one's inner Godliness. Elijah Muhammad taught that humans could develop parapsychological powers and claimed that he personally had telepathic abilities. In this, it differs from the mainstream Islamic belief in a fundamental ontological divide between humanity and God; in mainstream Islam, Allah is always portrayed as eternal and non-anthropomorphic, which is at odds with the theology of the NOI.
Cosmogony and the Tribe of Shabazz.
The Nation teaches that in the beginning there was nothing but darkness. Then, 76 trillion years ago, the first God willed himself into being, taking 6 million years to form into his desired appearance; that of a black man. In this cosmological account, this God chose his skin colour in reference to the blackness from which he had emerged. According to the Nation, the first God then created the Sun and the planets. As his helpers, he created more black men, including a council of 24 imams; 12 greater and 12 lesser. Each of these imams takes a turn being God for one cycle each. 15,000 years ago, the assembled scientists—who had knowledge of the future—wrote their knowledge down in a text, the Mother Book. Parts of this, the NOI claims, have been given to humanity as the Torah, Gospels, and Quran.
The Nation holds that the moon was not created by a God, but rather appeared when one of the black scientists tried to destroy the Earth with explosives, resulting in a chunk of the Earth's mass being forced into orbit. The Nation also alleges that Asia and Africa were once a single continent. 
In endorsing a form of creationism, the Nation rejects evolution and believes that the existence of dinosaurs is a hoax perpetrated by members of the white race.
The NOI promotes numerology, the belief that numbers possess hidden meanings; it believes that the number 19 is key to decoding scriptures such as the Quran, and takes the view that it is meaningful that the names of both Elijah Muhammad and Louis Farrakhan have 14 letters in them.
The Nation teaches that the first humans were the "Original" or "Asiatic" race, whom it describes as members of the Tribe of Shabazz. It claims that this Tribe inhabited Egypt's Nile Valley as well as the area around Mecca in the Arabian peninsula; Elijah Muhammad claimed that Mecca was the Tribe's original home and "the ONLY HOLY SPOT on our planet". He claimed that the Tribe were Muslim and that their language was Arabic. In the Nation's discourse, these early humans are identified as being "black". According to Elijah Muhammad's teachings, the first humans looked most like dark-complexioned Arabians or South Asians; their hair was smooth and straight. Elijah Muhammad and his followers claimed that one (unnamed) scientist then gave some of the Original Race Afro-textured hair as part of a process of toughening them so that they could live in the "jungles of East Asia", by which he meant Africa. The idea that black people were Asiatic in origin was previously popularised by Noble Drew Ali.
The NOI's conception of race differed from that of most Americans. For the Nation, everyone not of West European genetic origin is a descendant of the Original Asiatic Race. In the group's discourse, "black" does not simply mean those of Sub-Saharan African genetic descent, but all people of colour from across the world, including Asians, North Africans, and Native Americans; only white people of West European descent are excluded. Elijah Muhammad for instance referred to "black, brown, yellow [and] red" people as collectively constituting "black mankind", which he then juxtaposed against the "white race". He considered some East Europeans, such as Albanians, to be descendants of the Original Asiatic Race. The Nation claimed that all descendants of the Original Race were Muslims by their intrinsic nature, but that some had created heretical deviations such as Hinduism and Buddhism. The Natives of North America are described as members of the Original Race who were exiled from Asia for breaking the rules of Islam; Farrakhan adopted two Native American children. From research conducted at the start of the 21st century, Barnett thought that the NOI members were increasingly juxtaposing white people not just against black people, but against people of color more broadly.
The Myth of Yakub and the white race.
The NOI promotes a creation story known as the Myth of Yakub, which received its fullest exposition in Elijah Muhammad's 1965 book "Message to the Blackman". Yakub is presented as a black scientist who was a child prodigy; by the age of 18 he had learned everything that Mecca's universities had to teach him. He attracted a following but also caused trouble, leading the Meccan authorities to exile him and his 6000 followers to Pelan, the Mediterranean island of Patmos. There, the NOI claims, Yakub engaged in a selective breeding program to create the white race. This entailed breeding new children, with those who were too dark being killed at birth, their bodies fed to wild animals or incinerated. Gradually, over two centuries, Yakub's experiments created a race of blonde, light-skinned people, the white race. The Myth of Yakub presents the white race as being degenerate, sub-human, and bereft of divinity. Because of this, the NOI teaches that white people are intrinsically prone to lying, violence, and brutality. Elijah Muhammad repeatedly referred to the white man as the devil. Its ideas regarding white people have been labelled both racist, and racialist.
According to the Nation's teaching, Yakub's newly created white race sowed discord among the black race, and thus were exiled to live in the caves of Europe. In this narrative, it was in Europe that the white race engaged in bestiality and degenerated, resulting in the emergence of apes and monkeys. Aware of their role in the future, Allah sent Moses to teach the white race to cook and wear clothes. According to the Nation, Jesus of Nazareth was also sent to try and civilise the white race; Farrakhan's NOI has taught that Jesus was not the messiah, as Christians believe, but that he instead pointed to the later coming of the true messiah, Elijah Muhammad. They reject the Christian belief that Jesus was God, that he was the product of a virgin birth, or that he was crucified and resurrected.
In Nation teaching, Allah permitted the white race to rule the Earth for 6000 years, a period that is almost at an end. The NOI teaches that the white race spread out from Europe and began to dominate the world. It conquered and enslaved the Tribe of Shabazz, shipping many of them to the Americas as part of the Atlantic slave trade. It claims that most of these enslaved blacks forgot their true names, their Arabic language, and their Muslim identity, instead embracing Christianity, the religion of the white oppressor. In this enslaved state, the black people lost their morality, engaging in sinful behaviour such as fornication and drinking alcohol. The Nation teaches that Allah allowed all this to happen so that the black race would realise humanity's inner potential for evil and discover how to defeat it, thus enabling them to realize their divine capacity and become Gods.
The subjugation of African Americans is thus seen as part of an ancient white conspiracy. According to the NOI, most whites are unaware of their true origins, but that senior Freemasons have this knowledge. It interprets opposition to the Nation from the U.S. government and white society as evidence for this. The United States is equated with the city of Babylon as presented in the Bible. The Nation interprets many of the problems facing the African American community in this light. Farrakhan has for instance claimed that the white establishment has encouraged a black gang culture to provide an excuse for the police killing of black youths, and that they are also responsible for flooding black-majority urban areas with drugs. Both Farrakhan and senior NOI spokesperson Abdul Alim Muhammad have claimed that the white establishment created the AIDS virus to exterminate black people. The Nation is openly critical of U.S. aggression towards countries with non-white majorities, especially when those countries also have Muslim majorities. In keeping with its anti-Western ethos, it has also adopted a consistently anti-Israel position, being both anti-Zionist and anti-imperialist.
Christianity is seen as "white man's religion." It is regarded as having perpetuated white domination and furthered the oppression of the African diaspora in the Americas; it is also associated with slavery and colonialism in the Nation of Islam's discourse. The religion is treated with suspicion out of the belief that the oppressed (African Americans) and the oppressors (European Americans) cannot share the same God. NOI believe that 1914 marked the start of the end of white supremacy, with the 6000 years of white domination coming to a close. 
During the time when Malcolm X was a member and leader of the Nation of Islam, he preached that black people were genetically superior to white people but were dominated by a system of white supremacy: 
After Malcolm X made his pilgrimage to Mecca, he said that seeing Muslims of "all colors, from blue-eyed blonds to black-skinned Africans", interacting as equals led him to see Islam as a means by which racial problems could be overcome. He credits his evolving views on Islam and race as a reason for leaving the Nation of Islam and his decision to convert to Sunni Islam.
Eschatology and the Mother Plane.
The NOI is a millenarian movement, believing that humanity is currently living in end times. It propounds a distinct eschatology drawing on the Book of Revelation. Central to its view of the apocalypse is a large spaceship, known as the Wheel, the Mother Plane, or the Mother Ship. Members usually refer to it with female pronouns. Elijah Muhammad described this as "a small human planet," claiming that it is half a mile by half a mile in diameter. The Nation teaches that this vessel is the Merkabah that appears in the Book of Ezekiel (1: 4–28). It teaches that Allah and many of his scientists live in a magnificent city on the Mother Plane, from which Allah monitors humanity. Farrakhan also stated that Elijah Muhammad is alive and resident aboard the ship. The Nation teaches that there are also smaller vessels, "baby planes," docked inside the Mother Ship and that these travel to visit Earth.
The Nation teaches that a period of deteriorating inter-racial tensions will culminate in the apocalypse. NOI members have claimed that this apocalypse is imminent at various point; Farrakhan for instance predicted that the Gulf War of 1990 would spark it, while Tynetta Muhammad predicted it would occur in 2001. According to Nation teaching, the Mother Plane will appear above the Earth and transport the righteous to live upon it. It will then use the baby planes to place bombs beneath the Earth's surface, which will explode and wipe out the old, white-dominated order. 
The NOI has taught that the white ruling elite are aware of this forthcoming apocalypse and that the U.S. exploration of space and the Strategic Defense Initiative are futile attempts to protect themselves against the Mother Plane.
In the Nation's teaching, the Earth's atmosphere will burn for 390 years and then cool down for another 610. Once the Earth has returned to a habitable state, Allah will return the righteous to live there, in a new black paradise. In his book "The Supreme Wisdom", Elijah Muhammad claimed that after the apocalypse, "Peace, joy and happiness will have no end." Those living in this perfect society will eat the finest food and wear clothes of silk interwoven with gold.
Black nationalism and separatism.
Ideologically, the NOI is black nationalist, and has sometimes been perceived as a Black Power political organization. The scholar of religion Mattias Gardell commented that the idea of black unity is "at the very core of the NOI ideology." It seeks to empower black people by giving them a positive self-identity, purging ideas of white superiority, and black inferiority, from its followers. In the Nation's view, black liberation requires a religious dimension.
It regards African Americans, or black people more broadly, as the Chosen People, espousing a cosmology in which the black race is superior and the white race inferior.
The Nation is black separatist, arguing that the integration of races is a chaotic experiment. It called for the creation of a separate and sovereign African American nation-state in the southern part of what is currently the United States, portraying this as compensation for the unpaid labor of their enslaved ancestors. Farrakhan has also suggested that the countries of Africa should set aside land on that continent for the African diaspora, characterising this as a reparation for the complicity of West African states in the Atlantic slave trade.
It cites the formation of Israel as a state for the Jewish people in 1948 as a precedent for the establishment of such a state. Gardell suggested that any such black state formed under the Nation's leadership would be theocratic, authoritarian, and totalitarian. In his view, the Nation's political stance incorporated elements associated with both the right and left, and in doing so was similar to the stance of the Third Position, but that the Nation's political viewpoint was "homemade" rather than being an imitation of the Third Position ideology developed within the white far-right.
The Nation's racial separatism was at odds with the mainstream civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s. The Nation was critical of African American activists who promoted racial integration, such as Martin Luther King Jr and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, regarding them as "Uncle Tom Negroes." In contrast to King's calls for non-violent protest against segregation and racial violence, the Nation maintained it was a moral obligation for African Americans to defend their community from attack.
Unlike the Garveyites and Rastafari who strongly emphasise links between the African diaspora and Africa itself, Elijah Muhammad and the NOI have instead focused their attention on the African diaspora in the Americas, rejecting a specifically Pan-African ideology. Elijah Muhammad stated that "where as the Black man in Africa is our brother, our central responsibility is with the Black man here in the wilderness of North America." Rather than treating Africa as a homeland, the Nation's origin myths present Mecca in Saudi Arabia as the original home of African Americans; Africa itself was often portrayed in Nation writings as the least desirable of the Original Asiatic lands.
Gender and sexuality issues.
The NOI's teachings on gender issues are conservative and patriarchal; its moral teachings are compatible with those of American conservative Christianity. Emphasis is placed on the family unit; the Nation maintains that the security of the black family unit is ensured when its members adhere to their gendered duties and responsibilities. Men are expected to be providers for their family. Women are expected to act as caretakers of the household and the children, although in various cases they still play an active role in their communities. The group's leadership is overwhelmingly male, although several woman rose to senior positions during the 1990s; in 1998 the Nation appointed its first woman minister, Ava Muhammad, as head of Mosque Number 15 in Georgia. Men found to have beaten their wives are temporarily suspended from Nation membership. Children are expected to study hard, avoid street culture, and respect their elders.
The Nation expresses great concern regarding the emasculation of black men, attributing this attitude to the failure of black men to prevent the sexual assault of black women by white men over the centuries.
The NOI strictly enforces heterosexual monogamy among its members and encourages sexual abstinence prior to marriage. Farrakhan was initially highly critical of rap music because he argued it promoted sexual promiscuity. The Nation stipulates that its members should only marry other black people; it has claimed that having sex with white women emasculates black men. Birth control methods have been criticised as an attempt by the white establishment to lower the black birthrate, although Farrakhan has stated support for abortion in cases of rape or incest or where the woman's life is endangered by the pregnancy.
Homosexuality is condemned as immoral; Farrakhan for instance banned gay men from his Million Man March, bringing accusations of homophobia against him and the Nation.
Practices.
Services and prayer.
During the 1960s, the NOI's places of worship were called both temples and mosques. As well as serving a religious function, these can also be used as a community center, bank, school, and child-care facility.
Those attending meetings will sometimes be searched by members of the Fruit of Islam or the Muslim Girl's Training group, who look both for weapons and for objects like cosmetics and cigarettes which are disapproved of. After this, the attendees are seen to their seats, usually rows of benches. The sexes are segregated during worship, women on the right and men on the left. The tone of Nation services is sombre and quiet. Meetings at the mosque are both opened and closed with prayers, and the Nation's "national anthem" may be played. A lecture will be provided by one of the ministers. The minister may read out verses selected from either the Bible or Qur'an.
In the late 1950s, Elijah Muhammad published a prayer manual outlining how his followers should pray five times a day; this involved an ablution beforehand. He stipulated that these prayers should be in English, although commented that in future he would explain how to do so in Arabic. In later articles, he explained that his followers should face towards Mecca as they pray, symbolising their journey toward the restoration of black greatness.
Lifestyle.
The Nation requests that new members change any names inherited from slave-owners who owned their ancestors as a declaration of mental emancipation. This is not considered necessary if the new member has a name that is already African in origin. During the mid-20th century it began encouraging the use of "X" as a surname, symbolising what they regarded as African American identity's as an "ex-slave" and also as a marker for their lost ancestral name. As this results in many individuals having the same name, numbers are added before the X to differentiate members (i.e. "Charles 2X," "Charles 3X").
The NOI encourages its followers to live highly disciplined lifestyles, revolving around structure and order; these conservative and ascetic approaches have led to followers being called "Black Puritans." They are encouraged to obey the law, to seek gainful employment and to always be punctual. They are discouraged from gambling. It is typical for male members to cut their hair very short, sometimes shaving the head entirely, and to not wear a beard. This signifies their willingness to abide to the strict rules of the organisation and their renunciation of much personal choice. They are expected to wear suits with either ties or bowties; those who are part of the Fruit of Islam guards wear military-style uniforms. Women are commanded to dress modestly; they are not permitted to wear trousers and are encouraged to cover their heads, although the latter is deemed optional.
The NOI teaches that practitioners should seek to keep fit and maintain a healthy diet. Vegetarianism is encouraged among members, although not obligatory, with Elijah Muhammad writing that "meat was never intended for man to eat." In "How to Eat How to Live", Elijah Muhammad urged his followers to subsist primarily on fruit, vegetables, and certain grains, and to choose lamb if they must eat meat. Discouraged foods include dried fruits, white flour, additives, and fast food. The NOI also encourages followers to avoid foods associated with the slave culture of the U.S., such as cornbread, catfish, and collard greens, deeming this cuisine to be undignified. Concerned about obesity and diabetes among African Americans, Elijah Muhammad urged his followers to restrict their caloric intake, ideally by eating only one meal a day. He claimed that this would extend the human lifespan and that those who ate only once every 24 hours would live for 150 years and that those who ate once every seven days would live for 1,050 years. Members are also encouraged to conduct regular three-day fasts, and to fast during the daylight for the entirety of December. The NOI also prohibits the use of alcohol, tobacco, and other recreational drugs. 
Celebrations.
Adopting the traditional Islamic lunar calendar, the NOI has its own holy days which are celebrated throughout the year. The most important date in the Nation's year is February 26, Saviours' Day, which is believed to be the birthday of Fard Muhammad. This is the date on which the organization holds its annual national convention. Under Farrakhan, the Nation has also held a second Saviour's Day each year, on October 7, to mark the birth of Elijah Muhammad.
Members are encouraged to make the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca; Elijah Muhammad himself did so three times.
Economic and educational independence.
Espousing economic nationalism, the Nation follows the ideas of earlier thinkers like Booker T. Washington and Marcus Garvey in emphasizing the construction of black infrastructure as a means of community empowerment. The Nation has created many companies, including the Salaam restaurant chain, the Shabazz bakeries, the Fashahnn Islamic clothing range, the Clean 'N Fresh skin and haircare products, Abundant Life Clinics, and in Chicago it owns a mall. It owns various clothing stores and food markets, and in 1988, it established the Security Agency Incorporated, which provided FOI patrols for clients. In 1985 it launched its POWER (People Organized and Working for Economic Rebirth) project, designed to redirect black purchasing power toward black-owned businesses. It also seeks the collective economic advancement of African Americans through individual achievement; various women members created their own businesses, sometimes run from the home.
Some of its African American left-wing, anti-capitalist critics have derisively dismissed the Nation's approach to economics as black capitalism; Farrakhan has responded that while socialism appeals to him, capitalism is the only feasible road to economic empowerment for African Americans.
A commonly used slogan among the NOI is that "The farm is the engine of our national life." NOI members own urban gardens in various U.S. cities, and under Elijah Muhammad's leadership it bought 4,600 acres in southern Georgia. The group has launched Muhammad Farms in Bronwood, Georgia; much of the produce grown here is distributed to NOI mosques around the country. In 1991, the Nation launched its Three Year Economic Savings Plan, asking followers to send them $10 a month over the three years, money that would collectively allow the group to buy more farmland. For the Nation, acquiring land and growing food is regarded as a means of building self-determination for African Americans. It hopes to establish a system of black-owned farms through which to feed 40 million black people, with the stated aim of providing at least one healthy meal a day for every African American.
The NOI is highly critical of the U.S. school system, believing that, by being Eurocentric in its focus and concealing the achievement of non-white societies, it perpetuates white supremacy. To this end, the Nation has established its own educational system. Across the U.S. it has established Muhammad Universities of Islam; most of these are elementary schools, although a few also offer secondary education. These emphasize science, mathematics, black history, Arabic, and NOI doctrine; Farrakhan has said that they need to provide black children with "an education to make them Gods." In these schools, boys and girls are taught separately; pupils are only given two weeks of vacation each year. Combating the idea that academic achievement entails "acting white," the Nation has sought to associate hard work in school with pride in being black. As well as African American pupils, some of these schools have also accepted students from Latino, Asian, and Pacific Island communities.
Civic engagement.
The Nation also has a longstanding record of involvement in civic, economic, and political activities outside the strictly religious arena. In some economically deprived areas, they have played a role in providing services that the public institutions have not. In some areas with high African American populations, it has for instance engaged in door-to-door campaigns to raise awareness about local pollution, or used the FOI to patrol neighborhoods as a community watchdog, especially to stop drug-dealing. The Nation has also urged African Americans not to rely on state welfare payments, arguing that this undermines the community's ability to be self-sufficient.
The scholar Edward E. Curtis IV stated that the Nation is "both highly religious and political at the same time", while Gardell noted that it "formulated emphatic political demands". However, the NOI has urged its members to avoid mainstream electoral politics. Elijah Muhammad refused to support any African Americans campaigning for election, although Louis Farrakhan backed Jesse Jackson's 1984 campaign to become the Democratic Party's presidential candidate, and in 1990 three NOI candidates stood for election in the U.S.
Many people have presumed the NOI to be a revolutionary movement, however, it has not sought to foment political revolution or violent social change, instead focusing its emphasis on shifting the consciousness of its members, encouraging them to focus on personal moral improvement, family building, and economic activity. Its members avoided involvement in the race riots of the 1960s.
Organization.
Leadership.
Family ties are an important element of the NOI's senior ranks; various members of Elijah Muhammad's family were for instance married to members of Farrakhan's family.
As of 2020, the Nation consisted of ten ministries: for Spiritual Development, Agriculture, Education, Information, Health, Trade and Commerce, Defense, Justice, Arts and Culture, and Science and Technology. It also established a shadow ministry, forming the prototype for the governance of the future state it hopes to lead.
The Fruit of Islam is an elite group of men within the NOI, tasked with adhering to its rules more strictly than other members. The FOI members are trained in military protocol, wrestling, boxing, and judo. They are charged with protecting the temples. The Nation has also established Muslim Girls' Training and General Civilization Class for women, teaching them domestic skills.
The NOI explains that its finances come primarily from donations and its businesses. Although the Nation does not reveal the extent of its financial resources, in the 1990s its assets were estimated to total $80,000,000.
Domestic and international affiliations.
In the 1930s and 1940s, the Nation had links with Satokata Takahashi, a Japanese man who was promoting pro-Japanese sentiment among African American groups. Takahashi lived with an officer of the Nation for a time and also married a former member. Elijah Muhammad declared that Takahashi was teaching African Americans that "the Japanese were brothers and friends of the American Negroes". During the Second World War, in which the U.S. fought against Japan, many Nation members expressed pro-Japanese sentiment and refused the draft to fight against the Japanese military, stating that they would not fight people whom they regarded as fellow members of the Original Asiatic Race.
Under Elijah Muhammad, the Nation established relations with various Muslim countries, regarded as strategic allies in its conflict with the U.S. government. In 1957, Malcolm X organized a conference on colonialism attended by delegates from Egypt, Iraq, Sudan, and Morocco, while Elijah Muhammad met with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1959 and the Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi in 1972. On taking control, Farrakhan also pursued links with various Muslim-majority countries, visiting Ghana and Libya in 1985. For many years, Gaddafi was the Nation's most prominent international supporter and offered them assistance in various forms. His government gave the Nation a $3 million interest-free loan in 1972 to purchase its Chicago South Side centre, and another $5 million interest-free loan in 1985 to fund its black enterprise program. It later offered Farrakhan's Nation $1 billion, which the U.S. government sought to block. In 1996, Farrakhan embarked on a tour of Africa and the Middle East, meeting with leaders including Gaddafi, Ghana's Jerry Rawlings, Nigeria's Sani Abacha, South Africa's Nelson Mandela, and Iraq's Saddam Hussein. On that tour, he also attended annual celebrations of the Iranian Revolution in Tehran; he visited Iran again in 2018.
Like Garvey's UNIA before them, the Nation has also built links with white nationalist and other far-right white groups on the basis of their shared belief in racial separatism. Malcolm X revealed that the Nation had held meetings with representatives of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) and the American Nazi Party (ANP). The ANP's leader George Lincoln Rockwell attended an NOI rally in Washington DC in 1961 and then spoke at the Nation's St Saviour's Day rally in Chicago in 1962. Links with the white far-right continued under Farrakhan's Nation, with Tom Metzger of the White Aryan Resistance donating money to the Nation in 1985 and expressing approval of its separatist aims. During the 1980s, the Nation also had a supportive relationship with the British National Front as the latter's Strasserite leadership were endorsing a united front against multi-racial society. During the 1990s, the Nation collaborated with members of the far-right LaRouche movement as part of their shared opposition to the U.S.-led Gulf War. These links have not prevented some white far-right opposition to the NOI; in 1993 the Fourth Reich Skinheads were revealed to have plotted to kill Farrakhan.
Press and media.
From its early days, the Nation used print media to promote its ideas, including the magazines "Muhammad Speaks" (1961–75) and "The Final Call". "Muhammad Speaks" included contributions not only from Nation members, but also from leftist and progressive writers in the African American community. 
Members were encouraged to sell these magazines on street corners or sometimes door-to-door in African American-majority areas. The Nation has since established websites and a presence across many social media outlets. 
NOI video titles include "Conspiracy of the International Bankers", "Conspiracy of the U.S. Government", "Controversy with Jews", and "Which One Will You Choose, the Flag of Islam or the Flag of America?" In one video Farrakhan is said to state, "I hasten to tell you that the precious lives that were lost in the World Trade Center was a cover, a cover for a war that had been planned to bring a pipeline through Afghanistan to bring oil from that region, oil owned by Unocal, of which Dick Cheney is a stock holder."
Conversion and demographics.
Since its early years, the NOI has sought to recruit disenfranchised African American Christians; its process of seeking converts is termed "fishing for the dead." To this end, the Nation holds regular open meetings, mass rallies, street-corner lectures, and prison outreach. Young "brothers" seek new recruits in "jails and penitentiaries, pool halls and barbershops, college campuses and street corners." It has also utilized books by Elijah Muhammad, radio broadcasts, and audio-recorded speeches to promote its message.
The group's recruitment efforts have proved particularly effective among incarcerated criminals and drug addicts; many of its members, including Malcolm X, were recruited while in prison. Farrakhan stepped up the Nation's prison ministry in the 1980s in response to the increasing incarceration of young black men under the Reagan administration; some incarcerated members have claimed to have experienced discriminatory treatment from prison authorities because of their religion. In focusing its attentions on prisons, and among urban youth and the permanent poor, the Nation operated in areas where the black Christian churches lack a strong presence. The availability of NOI material in prisons has raised concerns in the U.S. government, with Peter King and Frank Wolf expressing concern about its potential role in the radicalization of inmates.
The Nation originated as a largely lower-class movement although over the course of the 20th century became increasingly middle-class. Gardell suggested that this was partly due to the Nation's focus on hard work and rigid morality, which helped improve the economic situation of its members, coupled with the broader growth of the African American middle-class in this period. He also believed that the changing class composition, and with it a less hostile attitude to white-dominant American society, assisted the shift to Sunnism under Wallace Muhammad in the 1970s.
Prior to 1975, only a small number of Hispanic American and Native American individuals were members of the NOI, although under Farrakhan the Nation began putting greater efforts into recruiting among these groups. The number of Latinos in the Nation is not known, although their presence in the group is much higher under Farrakhan than it was under Elijah Muhammad.
Not all members are likely to believe every teaching of the Nation implicitly, and there are reports of members who privately break the Nation's rules, for instance by listening to jazz records and smoking marijuana.
The Nation does not publicly reveal its membership numbers. One estimate in 1963 suggested that there were between 50,000 and 250,000 members, or between 1,200 and 50,000 or 75,000. In 2007, the scholar of religion Lawrence A. Mamiya suggested that there were then around 50,000 members of the Nation.
Reception.
The Nation of Islam became the largest black nationalist organization in the United States, having cultivated a sense of pride among many African Americans and made a noted effort to improve their education and welfare. At the start of the 21st century, Barrett called the NOI "one of the most visible and controversial black religions," while in the 1990s Gardell termed it the "most renowned and controversial" of the African American Muslim groups.
The scholar of African American studies Priscilla McCutcheon noted that although the NOI remained a comparatively small religion, it had "a wide discursive reach", while in 1996 Gardell commented that its influence among black youth "far exceeds" its membership. The Nation's role in confronting gang violence, drugs, and poverty among African American communities has earned them respect. The sociologist A.A. Akom opined that the NOI had a reputation even among non-Muslim African Americans of "speaking truth to power," with a 1994 "Time"/CNN poll found that two-thirds of African Americans who knew of Farrakhan had favorable views of him. 
The Nation's teachings have influenced other groups, such as the Ansaaru Allah Community, which formed in 1970, and the Word of Faith movement, a type of Christianity which emerged in areas of the U.S. where the NOI had a pre-existing presence. The Nation has also influenced a range of hip hop and rap artists, including Public Enemy, Ice Cube, Kam, The Skinny Boys, Sister Souljah, and Prince Akeem.
The NOI has been the subject of much scholarly attention. During the 20th century, most studies on the NOI relied on secondary sources due to the group's general unwillingness to open itself up to study. Those outside the movement have often seen its teachings as illogical and irrational, while mainstream scientists, and much of the wider public, regard its mythological accounts as being pseudo-scientific. In the U.S., various Islamic groups, such as the Federation of Islamic Associations of the United States and Canada, have distanced themselves from the Nation and have claimed that it is not a legitimate Islamic group. The Ahmadiyya, an Islamic group whose legitimacy is also often rejected by mainstream Muslim communities, similarly does not recognise the NOI as Islamic. Farrakhan has responded to such criticisms with his own critique of the mainstream Islamic world, accusing it of racism, of being obedient to the U.S. government, of engaging in sectarian violence, and of excessively relying on the "hadith" rather than the Quran.
Accusations of prejudice.
The Nation has repeatedly been accused of stirring up racial hatred against white people. It has been called a hate group by African American civil rights activists including the NAACP's Roy Wilkins, as well as by the Southern Poverty Law Center, which claims that the NOI teaches a "theology of innate black superiority over whites". The Associated Press has described the Nation's views as favoring "black supremacy". In a 1993 speech at Kean College, the NOI representative Khalid Abdul Muhammad stated that White South Africans should be given 24 hours to leave their country, and that all those left after that point should be killed; Farrakhan censured him for the tone of this speech. The Nation has also been accused of anti-LGBT rhetoric.
The NOI has also been repeatedly accused of antisemitism, an accusation that it has denied. Accusations of antisemitism have been levelled at Malcolm X, and also at Farrakhan; in the 1980s he referred to Judaism as a "dirty religion", and has also described Adolf Hitler as a "very great man" who "raised Germany up from nothing". He has rejected Judaism's claim that Jews are God's Chosen People as "ridiculous", insisting that this role is taken by the black race. At his Kean College speech, Khalid Mohammad had referred to the "Jew-nited Nations" in "Jew York City" and stated that the Jewish people deserved Hitler. The NOI Health Minister Abdul Alim Muhammad accused Jewish doctors of injecting blacks with the AIDS virus; in 2020 Ishmael Muhammad claimed that Jewish people were receiving different vaccines for COVID-19 from other people. 
In 1991, the NOI published an anonymously authored book, "The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews"; this generated controversy for arguing that Jewish individuals had a disproportionately high level of involvement in the Atlantic slave trade.
David W. Leinweber of Emory University asserts that the Nation of Islam engages in revisionist and antisemitic interpretations of the Holocaust and that they exaggerate the role of Jews in the trans-Atlantic slave trade.
Repeated accusations of antisemitism has come from the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), a U.S.-based Jewish organization which has referred to Farrakhan as "Black Hitler." The ADL has engaged in surveillance of the Nation, anti-NOI political lobbying, and attempts to block its enterprises. Farrakhan has stated, "The ADL ... uses the term 'anti-Semitism' to stifle all criticism of Zionism and the Zionist policies of the State of Israel and also to stifle all legitimate criticism of the errant behavior of some Jewish people toward the non-Jewish population of the earth." Other Jewish groups have also been critical of the NOI; four Jewish organizations withdrew their sponsorship of the Parliament of World Religions when it invited Farrakhan to speak, while Jewish student groups have sought to prevent Farrakhan giving speeches on university campuses, picketing these speeches when they have occurred. Far-right Jewish groups have gone further; the Jewish Defense League organized a "Death to Farrakhan" march in 1985, while the Jewish Defense Organization was found to have Farrakhan as the top name on its list of individuals it sought to kill.

