
The New International Version (NIV) is an English translation of the Bible first published in 1978 by Biblica (formerly the International Bible Society). The "NIV" was published to meet the need for a modern translation done by Bible scholars using the earliest, highest quality manuscripts available. Of equal importance was that the Bible be expressed in broadly understood modern English.
A team of 15 biblical scholars, representing a variety of evangelical denominations, worked from the oldest copies of reliable texts, variously written in Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek. Each section was subjected to multiple translations and revisions, and those assessed in detail to produce the best option. Everyday Bible readers were used to provide feedback on ease of understanding and comprehensibility. Finally, plans were made to continue revision of the Bible as new discoveries were made and as changes in the use of the English language occurred.
The "NIV" is published by Zondervan in the United States and Hodder &amp; Stoughton in the UK. The "NIV" was updated in 1984 and 2011 and has become one of the most popular and best-selling modern translations.
History.
The "NIV" began in 1956 with the formation of a small committee to study the value of producing a translation in the common language of the American people and a project of the National Association of Evangelicals in 1957. In 1967, Biblica took responsibility for the project and hired a team of 15 scholars from various Evangelical Christian denominations and from various countries. The initial "Committee on Bible Translation" consisted of Leslie Carlson, Edmund Clowney, Ralph Earle, Jr., Burton L. Goddard, R. Laird Harris, Earl S. Kalland, Kenneth Kantzer, Robert H. Mounce, Charles F. Pfeiffer, Charles Caldwell Ryrie, Francis R. Steele, John H. Stek, J. C. Wenger, Stephen W. Paine, and Marten Woudstra. The New Testament was released in 1973 and the full Bible in 1978.
The "NIV" underwent a minor revision in 1984. In 1995 a new version of the New Testament and Psalms was published in the UK, with the full Bible following in 1996 as the "New International Version Inclusive Language Edition", but was not published in the U.S. because of opposition from conservative evangelical groups there to inclusive language. A further edition with minor edits was published in 1999.
A revised English edition titled "Today's New International Version" ("TNIV") was released as a New Testament in March 2002, with the complete Bible being published in February 2005.
2011 update.
In 2011, an updated version of the "NIV" was released. The update modified and dropped some of the gender-neutral language of the "TNIV" such as going back to using "mankind" and "man" instead of "human beings" and "people"), along with other changes. Translational issues with Paul's letters were also addressed. Keith Danby, president and chief executive officer of Biblica, speaking of the TNIV, said they had failed to convince people revisions were needed and underestimated readers' loyalty to the 1984 edition.
Derivative versions.
Plain English version (NIrV).
An 'easy-reader' version, "New International Reader's Version" (NIrV), was published in 1996; it was written at a third grade reading level.
Spanish version (NVI).
In 1979, the decision was made to produce a version of the New Testament in Spanish with the title La Santa Biblia, Nueva Versión Internacional (often abbreviated "NVI"), though at this point this version was based only on the former English translation of the historic manuscripts. In 1990, the committee on Bible translation headed by Drs. René Padilla and Luciano Jaramillo conducted a translation of both testaments from the historic manuscripts directly into Spanish, bypassing English altogether and producing a complete Spanish NVI Bible in 1999.
Portuguese version (NVI).
In 2001, the Nova Versão Internacional in Portuguese was published.
Textual basis.
The manuscript base for the Old Testament was the Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia Masoretic Hebrew Text. Other ancient texts consulted were the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Samaritan Pentateuch, the Aquila, Symmachus and Theodotion, the Latin Vulgate, the Syriac Peshitta, the Aramaic Targum, and for the Psalms the Juxta Hebraica of Jerome. The manuscript base for the New Testament was the Koine Greek language editions of the United Bible Societies and of Nestle-Aland. The deuterocanonical books are not included in the translation.
Translation methodology.
The core translation group consisted of fifteen Biblical scholars using Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek texts whose goal was to produce a more modern English language text than the King James Version. The translation took ten years and involved a team of over 100 scholars from the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. The range of those participating included many different denominations such as Anglicans, Assemblies of God, Baptist, Christian Reformed, Lutheran and Presbyterian.
The "NIV" is a balance between word-for-word and thought-for-thought or literal and phrase-by-phrase translations.
Recent archaeological and linguistic discoveries helped in understanding passages that have traditionally been difficult to translate. Familiar spellings of traditional translations were generally retained.
Reception.
According to the Association for Christian Retail (CBA), the New International Version has become the most popular selling English translation of the Bible in CBA bookstores, having sold more than 450 million copies worldwide.
There are numerous study Bibles available with extensive notes on the text and background information to make the Biblical stories more comprehensible. Among these are the "NIV Spirit of the Reformation Study Bible", "Concordia Study Bible", the Zondervan published "NIV Study Bible", the Wesleyan revision, "Reflecting God Study Bible", as well as the "Life Application Study Bible".
In 2009, the New Testament scholar N. T. Wright wrote that the "NIV" obscured what Paul the Apostle was saying, making sure that Paul's words conformed to Protestant and Evangelical tradition. He claims, "if a church only, or mainly, relies on the "NIV" it will, quite simply, never understand what Paul was talking about," especially in Galatians and Romans. In support of this claim, Wright mentions specifically several verses of Romans 3, which he suggests do not convey how "righteousness" refers to the covenant faithfulness of God or reflect his own thinking about the "pistis Christou" debate. All editions of the "NIV" have given "God's Faithfulness" as the heading for Romans 3:1–8. Wright's specific objections concerning verses later in the chapter no longer apply to the 2011 revision of the NIV, which moreover offers "the faithfulness of Jesus Christ" as an alternative translation to "faith in Jesus Christ" in Romans 3:22.
Others have also criticized the "NIV". In Genesis 2:19 a translation such as the NRSV uses "formed" in a plain past tense: "So out of the ground the LORD God every animal..." Some have questioned the "NIV" choice of pluperfect: "Now the LORD God out of the ground all the wild animals..." to try to make it appear that the animals had already been created. Theologian John Sailhamer states "Not only is such a translation... hardly possible... but it misses the very point of the narrative, namely, that the animals were created in response to God's declaration that it was not good that the man should be alone."
Biblical scholar Bruce M. Metzger criticized the "NIV" 1984 edition for the addition of "just" into Jeremiah 7:22 so the verse becomes "For when I brought your forefathers/ancestors out of Egypt and spoke to them, I did not "just" give them commands about burnt offerings and sacrifices." Metzger also criticized the addition of "your" into , so it becomes "Though it (the mustard seed) is the smallest of all "your" seeds." The usage of "your" was removed in the 2011 revision.
Non-literal translation is used to give interpretations, such as in , which the "NIV" translates as "for we also forgive everyone who sins against us" rather than "for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us", or translating the Greek word "sarx" (flesh) as "sinful nature".
2011 revision.
Professor of New Testament Studies Daniel B. Wallace praised the 2011 update, calling it "a well-thought out translation, with checks and balances through rigorous testing, overlapping committees to ensure consistency and accuracy, and a publisher willing to commit significant resources to make this Bible appealing to the Christian reader." The Southern Baptist Convention rejected the 2011 update because of gender-neutral language, although it had dropped some gender-neutral language of the 2005 revision. Southern Baptist publisher LifeWay declined the SBC's censor request to remove the "NIV" from their stores. While the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod rejected its use, some in the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS) believe many of the translations changes are right and defensible.
Professor of New Testament Studies Rodney J. Decker wrote in the "Themelios Journal" review of the "NIV" 2011:
By taking a mediating position between formal and functional equivalence (though tending, I think, closer to the formal end of the spectrum), the "NIV" has been able to produce a text that is clearer than many translations, especially those weighted more heavily with formal equivalence... If we are serious about making the word of God a vital tool in the lives of English-speaking Christians, then we must aim for a translation that communicates clearly in the language of the average English-speaking person. It is here that the "NIV" excels. It not only communicates the meaning of God's revelation accurately, but does so in English that is easily understood by a wide range of English speakers. It is as well-suited for expository preaching as it is for public reading and use in Bible classes and children's ministries.

