


 e^{-\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{x - \mu}{\sigma}\right)^2}&lt;/math&gt;
 | cdf = formula_1
 | quantile = formula_2
 | mean = formula_3
 | median = formula_3
 | mode = formula_3
 | variance = formula_6
 | mad = formula_7
 | skewness = formula_8
 | kurtosis = formula_8 
 | entropy = formula_10
 | mgf = formula_11
 | char = formula_12
 | fisher = formula_13 
formula_14
 | KLDiv = formula_15
In probability theory, a normal (or Gaussian or Gauss or Laplace–Gauss) distribution is a type of continuous probability distribution for a real-valued random variable. The general form of its probability density function is
The parameter formula_3 is the mean or expectation of the distribution (and also its median and mode), while the parameter formula_18 is its standard deviation. The variance of the distribution is formula_6. A random variable with a Gaussian distribution is said to be normally distributed, and is called a normal deviate.
Normal distributions are important in statistics and are often used in the natural and social sciences to represent real-valued random variables whose distributions are not known. Their importance is partly due to the central limit theorem. It states that, under some conditions, the average of many samples (observations) of a random variable with finite mean and variance is itself a random variable—whose distribution converges to a normal distribution as the number of samples increases. Therefore, physical quantities that are expected to be the sum of many independent processes, such as measurement errors, often have distributions that are nearly normal.
Moreover, Gaussian distributions have some unique properties that are valuable in analytic studies. For instance, any linear combination of a fixed collection of normal deviates is a normal deviate. Many results and methods, such as propagation of uncertainty and least squares parameter fitting, can be derived analytically in explicit form when the relevant variables are normally distributed.
A normal distribution is sometimes informally called a bell curve. However, many other distributions are bell-shaped (such as the Cauchy, Student's "t", and logistic distributions).
Definitions.
Standard normal distribution.
The simplest case of a normal distribution is known as the "standard normal distribution". This is a special case when formula_20 and formula_21, and it is described by this probability density function:
Here, the factor formula_23 ensures that the total area under the curve formula_24 is equal to one. The factor formula_25 in the exponent ensures that the distribution has unit variance (i.e., variance being equal to one), and therefore also unit standard deviation. This function is symmetric around formula_26, where it attains its maximum value formula_23 and has inflection points at formula_28 and formula_29.
Authors differ on which normal distribution should be called the "standard" one. Carl Friedrich Gauss, for example, defined the standard normal as having a variance of formula_30. That is:
On the other hand, Stephen Stigler goes even further, defining the standard normal as having a variance of formula_32:
General normal distribution.
Every normal distribution is a version of the standard normal distribution, whose domain has been stretched by a factor formula_18 (the standard deviation) and then translated by formula_3 (the mean value):
The probability density must be scaled by formula_37 so that the integral is still 1.
If formula_38 is a standard normal deviate, then formula_39 will have a normal distribution with expected value formula_3 and standard deviation formula_18. This is equivalent to saying that the "standard" normal distribution formula_38 can be scaled/stretched by a factor of formula_18 and shifted by formula_3 to yield a different normal distribution, called formula_45. Conversely, if formula_45 is a normal deviate with parameters formula_3 and formula_6, then this formula_45 distribution can be re-scaled and shifted via the formula formula_50 to convert it to the "standard" normal distribution. This variate is also called the standardized form of formula_45.
Notation.
The probability density of the standard Gaussian distribution (standard normal distribution, with zero mean and unit variance) is often denoted with the Greek letter formula_52 (phi). The alternative form of the Greek letter phi, formula_53, is also used quite often.
The normal distribution is often referred to as formula_54 or formula_55. Thus when a random variable formula_45 is normally distributed with mean formula_3 and standard deviation formula_18, one may write
Alternative parameterizations.
Some authors advocate using the precision formula_60 as the parameter defining the width of the distribution, instead of the deviation formula_18 or the variance formula_6. The precision is normally defined as the reciprocal of the variance, formula_63. The formula for the distribution then becomes
This choice is claimed to have advantages in numerical computations when formula_18 is very close to zero, and simplifies formulas in some contexts, such as in the Bayesian inference of variables with multivariate normal distribution.
Alternatively, the reciprocal of the standard deviation formula_66 might be defined as the "precision", in which case the expression of the normal distribution becomes
According to Stigler, this formulation is advantageous because of a much simpler and easier-to-remember formula, and simple approximate formulas for the quantiles of the distribution.
Normal distributions form an exponential family with natural parameters formula_68 and formula_69, and natural statistics "x" and "x"2. The dual expectation parameters for normal distribution are and .
Cumulative distribution function.
The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the standard normal distribution, usually denoted with the capital Greek letter formula_70 (phi), is the integral
The related error function formula_72 gives the probability of a random variable, with normal distribution of mean 0 and variance 1/2 falling in the range formula_73. That is:
These integrals cannot be expressed in terms of elementary functions, and are often said to be special functions. However, many numerical approximations are known; see below for more.
The two functions are closely related, namely
For a generic normal distribution with density formula_76, mean formula_3 and deviation formula_18, the cumulative distribution function is
The complement of the standard normal CDF, formula_80, is often called the Q-function, especially in engineering texts. It gives the probability that the value of a standard normal random variable formula_45 will exceed formula_82: formula_83. Other definitions of the formula_84-function, all of which are simple transformations of formula_70, are also used occasionally.
The graph of the standard normal CDF formula_70 has 2-fold rotational symmetry around the point (0,1/2); that is, formula_87. Its antiderivative (indefinite integral) can be expressed as follows: 
The CDF of the standard normal distribution can be expanded by Integration by parts into a series:
where formula_90 denotes the double factorial.
An asymptotic expansion of the CDF for large "x" can also be derived using integration by parts. For more, see Error function#Asymptotic expansion.
A quick approximation to the standard normal distribution's CDF can be found by using a taylor series approximation:
formula_91
Standard deviation and coverage.
About 68% of values drawn from a normal distribution are within one standard deviation "σ" away from the mean; about 95% of the values lie within two standard deviations; and about 99.7% are within three standard deviations. This fact is known as the 68-95-99.7 (empirical) rule, or the "3-sigma rule".
More precisely, the probability that a normal deviate lies in the range between formula_92 and formula_93 is given by
To 12 significant figures, the values for formula_95 are:
For large formula_96, one can use the approximation formula_97.
Quantile function.
The quantile function of a distribution is the inverse of the cumulative distribution function. The quantile function of the standard normal distribution is called the probit function, and can be expressed in terms of the inverse error function:
For a normal random variable with mean formula_3 and variance formula_6, the quantile function is
The quantile formula_102 of the standard normal distribution is commonly denoted as formula_103. These values are used in hypothesis testing, construction of confidence intervals and Q-Q plots. A normal random variable formula_45 will exceed formula_105 with probability formula_106, and will lie outside the interval formula_107 with probability formula_108. In particular, the quantile formula_109 is 1.96; therefore a normal random variable will lie outside the interval formula_110 in only 5% of cases.
The following table gives the quantile formula_103 such that formula_45 will lie in the range formula_107 with a specified probability formula_114. These values are useful to determine tolerance interval for sample averages and other statistical estimators with normal (or asymptotically normal) distributions:. NOTE: the following table shows formula_115, not formula_102 as defined above.
For small formula_114, the quantile function has the useful asymptotic expansion 
formula_118
Properties.
The normal distribution is the only distribution whose cumulants beyond the first two (i.e., other than the mean and variance) are zero. It is also the continuous distribution with the maximum entropy for a specified mean and variance. Geary has shown, assuming that the mean and variance are finite, that the normal distribution is the only distribution where the mean and variance calculated from a set of independent draws are independent of each other.
The normal distribution is a subclass of the elliptical distributions. The normal distribution is symmetric about its mean, and is non-zero over the entire real line. As such it may not be a suitable model for variables that are inherently positive or strongly skewed, such as the weight of a person or the price of a share. Such variables may be better described by other distributions, such as the log-normal distribution or the Pareto distribution.
The value of the normal distribution is practically zero when the value formula_82 lies more than a few standard deviations away from the mean (e.g., a spread of three standard deviations covers all but 0.27% of the total distribution). Therefore, it may not be an appropriate model when one expects a significant fraction of outliers—values that lie many standard deviations away from the mean—and least squares and other statistical inference methods that are optimal for normally distributed variables often become highly unreliable when applied to such data. In those cases, a more heavy-tailed distribution should be assumed and the appropriate robust statistical inference methods applied.
The Gaussian distribution belongs to the family of stable distributions which are the attractors of sums of independent, identically distributed distributions whether or not the mean or variance is finite. Except for the Gaussian which is a limiting case, all stable distributions have heavy tails and infinite variance. It is one of the few distributions that are stable and that have probability density functions that can be expressed analytically, the others being the Cauchy distribution and the Lévy distribution.
Symmetries and derivatives.
The normal distribution with density formula_120 (mean formula_3 and standard deviation formula_122) has the following properties:
Furthermore, the density formula_53 of the standard normal distribution (i.e. formula_20 and formula_134) also has the following properties:
Moments.
The plain and absolute moments of a variable formula_45 are the expected values of formula_144 and formula_145, respectively. If the expected value formula_3 of formula_45 is zero, these parameters are called "central moments". Usually we are interested only in moments with integer order formula_148.
If formula_45 has a normal distribution, these moments exist and are finite for any formula_114 whose real part is greater than −1. For any non-negative integer formula_114, the plain central moments are:
Here formula_153 denotes the double factorial, that is, the product of all numbers from formula_96 to 1 that have the same parity as formula_155
The central absolute moments coincide with plain moments for all even orders, but are nonzero for odd orders. For any non-negative integer formula_156
The last formula is valid also for any non-integer formula_158 When the mean formula_159 the plain and absolute moments can be expressed in terms of confluent hypergeometric functions formula_160 and formula_161
These expressions remain valid even if formula_114 is not an integer. See also generalized Hermite polynomials.
The expectation of formula_45 conditioned on the event that formula_45 lies in an interval formula_166 is given by
where formula_76 and formula_168 respectively are the density and the cumulative distribution function of formula_45. For formula_170 this is known as the inverse Mills ratio. Note that above, density formula_76 of formula_45 is used instead of standard normal density as in inverse Mills ratio, so here we have formula_6 instead of formula_18.
Fourier transform and characteristic function.
The Fourier transform of a normal density formula_76 with mean formula_3 and standard deviation formula_18 is
where formula_179 is the imaginary unit. If the mean formula_20, the first factor is 1, and the Fourier transform is, apart from a constant factor, a normal density on the frequency domain, with mean 0 and standard deviation formula_37. In particular, the standard normal distribution formula_53 is an eigenfunction of the Fourier transform.
In probability theory, the Fourier transform of the probability distribution of a real-valued random variable formula_45 is closely connected to the characteristic function formula_184 of that variable, which is defined as the expected value of formula_185, as a function of the real variable formula_186 (the frequency parameter of the Fourier transform). This definition can be analytically extended to a complex-value variable formula_186. The relation between both is:
Moment and cumulant generating functions.
The moment generating function of a real random variable formula_45 is the expected value of formula_190, as a function of the real parameter formula_186. For a normal distribution with density formula_76, mean formula_3 and deviation formula_18, the moment generating function exists and is equal to
The cumulant generating function is the logarithm of the moment generating function, namely
Since this is a quadratic polynomial in formula_186, only the first two cumulants are nonzero, namely the mean formula_3 and the variance formula_6.
Stein operator and class.
Within Stein's method the Stein operator and class of a random variable formula_200 are formula_201 and formula_202 the class of all absolutely continuous functions formula_203.
Zero-variance limit.
In the limit when formula_18 tends to zero, the probability density formula_120 eventually tends to zero at any formula_206, but grows without limit if formula_207, while its integral remains equal to 1. Therefore, the normal distribution cannot be defined as an ordinary function when formula_208.
However, one can define the normal distribution with zero variance as a generalized function; specifically, as Dirac's "delta function" formula_209 translated by the mean formula_3, that is formula_211
Its CDF is then the Heaviside step function translated by the mean formula_3, namely
Maximum entropy.
Of all probability distributions over the reals with a specified mean formula_3 and variance formula_6, the normal distribution formula_54 is the one with maximum entropy. If formula_45 is a continuous random variable with probability density formula_120, then the entropy of formula_45 is defined as
where formula_221 is understood to be zero whenever formula_222. This functional can be maximized, subject to the constraints that the distribution is properly normalized and has a specified variance, by using variational calculus. A function with two Lagrange multipliers is defined:
where formula_120 is, for now, regarded as some density function with mean formula_3 and standard deviation formula_18.
At maximum entropy, a small variation formula_227 about formula_120 will produce a variation formula_229 about formula_230 which is equal to 0:
Since this must hold for any small formula_227, the term in brackets must be zero, and solving for formula_120 yields:
Using the constraint equations to solve for formula_235 and formula_236 yields the density of the normal distribution:
The entropy of a normal distribution is equal to
Other properties.
 &lt;/math&gt;
Related distributions.
Central limit theorem.
The central limit theorem states that under certain (fairly common) conditions, the sum of many random variables will have an approximately normal distribution. More specifically, where formula_248 are independent and identically distributed random variables with the same arbitrary distribution, zero mean, and variance formula_6 and formula_38 is their
mean scaled by formula_251
Then, as formula_96 increases, the probability distribution of formula_38 will tend to the normal distribution with zero mean and variance formula_6.
The theorem can be extended to variables formula_256 that are not independent and/or not identically distributed if certain constraints are placed on the degree of dependence and the moments of the distributions.
Many test statistics, scores, and estimators encountered in practice contain sums of certain random variables in them, and even more estimators can be represented as sums of random variables through the use of influence functions. The central limit theorem implies that those statistical parameters will have asymptotically normal distributions.
The central limit theorem also implies that certain distributions can be approximated by the normal distribution, for example:
Whether these approximations are sufficiently accurate depends on the purpose for which they are needed, and the rate of convergence to the normal distribution. It is typically the case that such approximations are less accurate in the tails of the distribution.
A general upper bound for the approximation error in the central limit theorem is given by the Berry–Esseen theorem, improvements of the approximation are given by the Edgeworth expansions.
This theorem can also be used to justify modeling the sum of many uniform noise sources as gaussian noise. See AWGN.
Operations and functions of normal variables.
The probability density, cumulative distribution, and inverse cumulative distribution of any function of one or more independent or correlated normal variables can be computed with the numerical method of ray-tracing (Matlab code). In the following sections we look at some special cases.
Operations on a single normal variable.
If "X" is distributed normally with mean "μ" and variance "σ"2, then
Since this is a scaled and shifted square of a standard normal variable, it is distributed as a scaled and shifted chi-squared variable.
Operations on two independent normal variables.
is also normally distributed with mean formula_3 and deviation formula_18. It follows that the normal distribution is stable (with exponent formula_304).
Operations on two independent standard normal variables.
If formula_280 and formula_281 are two independent standard normal random variables with mean 0 and variance 1, then
Operations on the density function.
The split normal distribution is most directly defined in terms of joining scaled sections of the density functions of different normal distributions and rescaling the density to integrate to one. The truncated normal distribution results from rescaling a section of a single density function.
Infinite divisibility and Cramér's theorem.
For any positive integer formula_316, any normal distribution with mean formula_328 and variance formula_6 is the distribution of the sum of formula_316 independent normal deviates, each with mean formula_331 and variance formula_332. This property is called infinite divisibility.
Conversely, if formula_280 and formula_281 are independent random variables and their sum formula_286 has a normal distribution, then both formula_280 and formula_281 must be normal deviates.
This result is known as Cramér’s decomposition theorem, and is equivalent to saying that the convolution of two distributions is normal if and only if both are normal. Cramér's theorem implies that a linear combination of independent non-Gaussian variables will never have an exactly normal distribution, although it may approach it arbitrarily closely.
Bernstein's theorem.
Bernstein's theorem states that if formula_45 and formula_290 are independent and formula_292 and formula_293 are also independent, then both "X" and "Y" must necessarily have normal distributions.
More generally, if formula_342 are independent random variables, then two distinct linear combinations formula_343 and formula_344will be independent if and only if all formula_345 are normal and formula_346, where formula_347 denotes the variance of formula_345.
Extensions.
The notion of normal distribution, being one of the most important distributions in probability theory, has been extended far beyond the standard framework of the univariate (that is one-dimensional) case (Case 1). All these extensions are also called "normal" or "Gaussian" laws, so a certain ambiguity in names exists.
A random variable "X" has a two-piece normal distribution if it has a distribution
where "μ" is the mean and "σ"1 and "σ"2 are the standard deviations of the distribution to the left and right of the mean respectively.
The mean, variance and third central moment of this distribution have been determined
where E("X"), V("X") and T("X") are the mean, variance, and third central moment respectively.
One of the main practical uses of the Gaussian law is to model the empirical distributions of many different random variables encountered in practice. In such case a possible extension would be a richer family of distributions, having more than two parameters and therefore being able to fit the empirical distribution more accurately. The examples of such extensions are:
Statistical inference.
Estimation of parameters.
It is often the case that we do not know the parameters of the normal distribution, but instead want to estimate them. That is, having a sample formula_354 from a normal formula_355 population we would like to learn the approximate values of parameters formula_3 and formula_6. The standard approach to this problem is the maximum likelihood method, which requires maximization of the "log-likelihood function":
Taking derivatives with respect to formula_3 and formula_6 and solving the resulting system of first order conditions yields the "maximum likelihood estimates":
Sample mean.
Estimator formula_362 is called the "sample mean", since it is the arithmetic mean of all observations. The statistic formula_363 is complete and sufficient for formula_3, and therefore by the Lehmann–Scheffé theorem, formula_362 is the uniformly minimum variance unbiased (UMVU) estimator. In finite samples it is distributed normally:
The variance of this estimator is equal to the "μμ"-element of the inverse Fisher information matrix formula_367. This implies that the estimator is finite-sample efficient. Of practical importance is the fact that the standard error of formula_362 is proportional to formula_369, that is, if one wishes to decrease the standard error by a factor of 10, one must increase the number of points in the sample by a factor of 100. This fact is widely used in determining sample sizes for opinion polls and the number of trials in Monte Carlo simulations.
From the standpoint of the asymptotic theory, formula_362 is consistent, that is, it converges in probability to formula_3 as formula_372. The estimator is also asymptotically normal, which is a simple corollary of the fact that it is normal in finite samples:
Sample variance.
The estimator formula_374 is called the "sample variance", since it is the variance of the sample (formula_354). In practice, another estimator is often used instead of the formula_374. This other estimator is denoted formula_377, and is also called the "sample variance", which represents a certain ambiguity in terminology; its square root formula_378 is called the "sample standard deviation". The estimator formula_377 differs from formula_374 by having instead of "n" in the denominator (the so-called Bessel's correction):
The difference between formula_377 and formula_374 becomes negligibly small for large "n"s. In finite samples however, the motivation behind the use of formula_377 is that it is an unbiased estimator of the underlying parameter formula_6, whereas formula_374 is biased. Also, by the Lehmann–Scheffé theorem the estimator formula_377 is uniformly minimum variance unbiased (UMVU), which makes it the "best" estimator among all unbiased ones. However it can be shown that the biased estimator formula_374 is "better" than the formula_377 in terms of the mean squared error (MSE) criterion. In finite samples both formula_377 and formula_374 have scaled chi-squared distribution with degrees of freedom:
The first of these expressions shows that the variance of formula_377 is equal to formula_394, which is slightly greater than the "σσ"-element of the inverse Fisher information matrix formula_367. Thus, formula_377 is not an efficient estimator for formula_6, and moreover, since formula_377 is UMVU, we can conclude that the finite-sample efficient estimator for formula_6 does not exist.
Applying the asymptotic theory, both estimators formula_377 and formula_374 are consistent, that is they converge in probability to formula_6 as the sample size formula_372. The two estimators are also both asymptotically normal:
In particular, both estimators are asymptotically efficient for formula_6.
Confidence intervals.
By Cochran's theorem, for normal distributions the sample mean formula_362 and the sample variance "s"2 are independent, which means there can be no gain in considering their joint distribution. There is also a converse theorem: if in a sample the sample mean and sample variance are independent, then the sample must have come from the normal distribution. The independence between formula_362 and "s" can be employed to construct the so-called "t-statistic":
This quantity "t" has the Student's t-distribution with degrees of freedom, and it is an ancillary statistic (independent of the value of the parameters). Inverting the distribution of this "t"-statistics will allow us to construct the confidence interval for "μ"; similarly, inverting the "χ"2 distribution of the statistic "s"2 will give us the confidence interval for "σ"2:
where "tk,p" and are the "p"th quantiles of the "t"- and "χ"2-distributions respectively. These confidence intervals are of the "confidence level" , meaning that the true values "μ" and "σ"2 fall outside of these intervals with probability (or significance level) "α". In practice people usually take , resulting in the 95% confidence intervals. The approximate formulas in the display above were derived from the asymptotic distributions of formula_362 and "s"2. The approximate formulas become valid for large values of "n", and are more convenient for the manual calculation since the standard normal quantiles "z""α"/2 do not depend on "n". In particular, the most popular value of , results in .
Normality tests.
Normality tests assess the likelihood that the given data set {"x"1, ..., "xn"} comes from a normal distribution. Typically the null hypothesis "H"0 is that the observations are distributed normally with unspecified mean "μ" and variance "σ"2, versus the alternative "Ha" that the distribution is arbitrary. Many tests (over 40) have been devised for this problem, the more prominent of them are outlined below:
Diagnostic plots are more intuitively appealing but subjective at the same time, as they rely on informal human judgement to accept or reject the null hypothesis.
Goodness-of-fit tests:
"Moment-based tests":
"Tests based on the empirical distribution function":
Bayesian analysis of the normal distribution.
Bayesian analysis of normally distributed data is complicated by the many different possibilities that may be considered:
The formulas for the non-linear-regression cases are summarized in the conjugate prior article.
Sum of two quadratics.
Scalar form.
The following auxiliary formula is useful for simplifying the posterior update equations, which otherwise become fairly tedious.
This equation rewrites the sum of two quadratics in "x" by expanding the squares, grouping the terms in "x", and completing the square. Note the following about the complex constant factors attached to some of the terms:
Vector form.
A similar formula can be written for the sum of two vector quadratics: If x, y, z are vectors of length "k", and A and B are symmetric, invertible matrices of size formula_417, then
where
Note that the form x′ A x is called a quadratic form and is a scalar:
In other words, it sums up all possible combinations of products of pairs of elements from x, with a separate coefficient for each. In addition, since formula_421, only the sum formula_422 matters for any off-diagonal elements of A, and there is no loss of generality in assuming that A is symmetric. Furthermore, if A is symmetric, then the form formula_423
Sum of differences from the mean.
Another useful formula is as follows:
where formula_425
With known variance.
For a set of i.i.d. normally distributed data points X of size "n" where each individual point "x" follows formula_426 with known variance σ2, the conjugate prior distribution is also normally distributed.
This can be shown more easily by rewriting the variance as the precision, i.e. using τ = 1/σ2. Then if formula_427 and formula_428 we proceed as follows.
First, the likelihood function is (using the formula above for the sum of differences from the mean):
Then, we proceed as follows:
In the above derivation, we used the formula above for the sum of two quadratics and eliminated all constant factors not involving "μ". The result is the kernel of a normal distribution, with mean formula_431 and precision formula_432, i.e.
This can be written as a set of Bayesian update equations for the posterior parameters in terms of the prior parameters:
That is, to combine "n" data points with total precision of "nτ" (or equivalently, total variance of "n"/"σ"2) and mean of values formula_435, derive a new total precision simply by adding the total precision of the data to the prior total precision, and form a new mean through a "precision-weighted average", i.e. a weighted average of the data mean and the prior mean, each weighted by the associated total precision. This makes logical sense if the precision is thought of as indicating the certainty of the observations: In the distribution of the posterior mean, each of the input components is weighted by its certainty, and the certainty of this distribution is the sum of the individual certainties. (For the intuition of this, compare the expression "the whole is (or is not) greater than the sum of its parts". In addition, consider that the knowledge of the posterior comes from a combination of the knowledge of the prior and likelihood, so it makes sense that we are more certain of it than of either of its components.)
The above formula reveals why it is more convenient to do Bayesian analysis of conjugate priors for the normal distribution in terms of the precision. The posterior precision is simply the sum of the prior and likelihood precisions, and the posterior mean is computed through a precision-weighted average, as described above. The same formulas can be written in terms of variance by reciprocating all the precisions, yielding the more ugly formulas
With known mean.
For a set of i.i.d. normally distributed data points X of size "n" where each individual point "x" follows formula_426 with known mean μ, the conjugate prior of the variance has an inverse gamma distribution or a scaled inverse chi-squared distribution. The two are equivalent except for having different parameterizations. Although the inverse gamma is more commonly used, we use the scaled inverse chi-squared for the sake of convenience. The prior for σ2 is as follows:
The likelihood function from above, written in terms of the variance, is:
where
Then:
The above is also a scaled inverse chi-squared distribution where
or equivalently
Reparameterizing in terms of an inverse gamma distribution, the result is:
With unknown mean and unknown variance.
For a set of i.i.d. normally distributed data points X of size "n" where each individual point "x" follows formula_426 with unknown mean μ and unknown variance σ2, a combined (multivariate) conjugate prior is placed over the mean and variance, consisting of a normal-inverse-gamma distribution.
Logically, this originates as follows:
The priors are normally defined as follows:
The update equations can be derived, and look as follows:
The respective numbers of pseudo-observations add the number of actual observations to them. The new mean hyperparameter is once again a weighted average, this time weighted by the relative numbers of observations. Finally, the update for formula_448 is similar to the case with known mean, but in this case the sum of squared deviations is taken with respect to the observed data mean rather than the true mean, and as a result a new "interaction term" needs to be added to take care of the additional error source stemming from the deviation between prior and data mean.
The prior distributions are
Therefore, the joint prior is
The likelihood function from the section above with known variance is:
Writing it in terms of variance rather than precision, we get:
where formula_453
Therefore, the posterior is (dropping the hyperparameters as conditioning factors):
In other words, the posterior distribution has the form of a product of a normal distribution over "p"("μ" | "σ"2) times an inverse gamma distribution over "p"(σ2), with parameters that are the same as the update equations above.
Occurrence and applications.
The occurrence of normal distribution in practical problems can be loosely classified into four categories:
Exact normality.
Certain quantities in physics are distributed normally, as was first demonstrated by James Clerk Maxwell. Examples of such quantities are:
Approximate normality.
"Approximately" normal distributions occur in many situations, as explained by the central limit theorem. When the outcome is produced by many small effects acting "additively and independently", its distribution will be close to normal. The normal approximation will not be valid if the effects act multiplicatively (instead of additively), or if there is a single external influence that has a considerably larger magnitude than the rest of the effects.
Assumed normality.
There are statistical methods to empirically test that assumption, see the above Normality tests section.
Methodological problems and peer review.
John Ioannidis argues that using normally distributed standard deviations as standards for validating research findings leave falsifiable predictions about phenomena that are not normally distributed untested. This includes, for example, phenomena that only appear when all necessary conditions are present and one cannot be a substitute for another in an addition-like way and phenomena that are not randomly distributed. Ioannidis argues that standard deviation-centered validation gives a false appearance of validity to hypotheses and theories where some but not all falsifiable predictions are normally distributed since the portion of falsifiable predictions that there is evidence against may and in some cases are in the non-normally distributed parts of the range of faslsifiable predictions, as well as baselessly dismissing hypotheses for which none of the falsifiable predictions are normally distributed as if were they unfalsifiable when in fact they do make falsifiable predictions. It is argued by Ioannidis that many cases of mutually exclusive theories being accepted as "validated" by research journals are caused by failure of the journals to take in empirical falsifications of non-normally distributed predictions, and not because mutually exclusive theories are true which they cannot be although two mutually exclusive theories can both be wrong and a third one correct.
Computational methods.
Generating values from normal distribution.
In computer simulations, especially in applications of the Monte-Carlo method, it is often desirable to generate values that are normally distributed. The algorithms listed below all generate the standard normal deviates, since a can be generated as , where "Z" is standard normal. All these algorithms rely on the availability of a random number generator "U" capable of producing uniform random variates.
Numerical approximations for the normal CDF and normal quantile function.
The standard normal CDF is widely used in scientific and statistical computing.
The values Φ("x") may be approximated very accurately by a variety of methods, such as numerical integration, Taylor series, asymptotic series and continued fractions. Different approximations are used depending on the desired level of accuracy.
Shore (1982) introduced simple approximations that may be incorporated in stochastic optimization models of engineering and operations research, like reliability engineering and inventory analysis. Denoting p=Φ(z), the simplest approximation for the quantile function is:
This approximation delivers for "z" a maximum absolute error of 0.026 (for 0.5 ≤ "p" ≤ 0.9999, corresponding to 0 ≤ "z" ≤ 3.725). For "p" &lt; 1/2 replace "p" by 1 − "p" and change sign. Another approximation, somewhat less accurate, is the single-parameter approximation:
The latter had served to derive a simple approximation for the loss integral of the normal distribution, defined by
This approximation is particularly accurate for the right far-tail (maximum error of 10−3 for z≥1.4). Highly accurate approximations for the CDF, based on Response Modeling Methodology (RMM, Shore, 2011, 2012), are shown in Shore (2005).
Some more approximations can be found at: Error function#Approximation with elementary functions. In particular, small "relative" error on the whole domain for the CDF formula_70 and the quantile function formula_463 as well, is achieved via an explicitly invertible formula by Sergei Winitzki in 2008.
History.
Development.
Some authors attribute the credit for the discovery of the normal distribution to de Moivre, who in 1738 published in the second edition of his "The Doctrine of Chances" the study of the coefficients in the binomial expansion of . De Moivre proved that the middle term in this expansion has the approximate magnitude of formula_464, and that "If "m" or ½"n" be a Quantity infinitely great, then the Logarithm of the Ratio, which a Term distant from the middle by the Interval "ℓ", has to the middle Term, is formula_465." Although this theorem can be interpreted as the first obscure expression for the normal probability law, Stigler points out that de Moivre himself did not interpret his results as anything more than the approximate rule for the binomial coefficients, and in particular de Moivre lacked the concept of the probability density function.
In 1823 Gauss published his monograph "Theoria combinationis observationum erroribus minimis obnoxiae" where among other things he introduces several important statistical concepts, such as the method of least squares, the method of maximum likelihood, and the "normal distribution". Gauss used "M", , to denote the measurements of some unknown quantity "V", and sought the "most probable" estimator of that quantity: the one that maximizes the probability of obtaining the observed experimental results. In his notation φΔ is the probability law of the measurement errors of magnitude Δ. Not knowing what the function "φ" is, Gauss requires that his method should reduce to the well-known answer: the arithmetic mean of the measured values. Starting from these principles, Gauss demonstrates that the only law that rationalizes the choice of arithmetic mean as an estimator of the location parameter, is the normal law of errors:
where "h" is "the measure of the precision of the observations". Using this normal law as a generic model for errors in the experiments, Gauss formulates what is now known as the non-linear weighted least squares (NWLS) method.
Although Gauss was the first to suggest the normal distribution law, Laplace made significant contributions. It was Laplace who first posed the problem of aggregating several observations in 1774, although his own solution led to the Laplacian distribution. It was Laplace who first calculated the value of the integral in 1782, providing the normalization constant for the normal distribution. Finally, it was Laplace who in 1810 proved and presented to the Academy the fundamental central limit theorem, which emphasized the theoretical importance of the normal distribution.
It is of interest to note that in 1809 an Irish mathematician Adrain published two derivations of the normal probability law, simultaneously and independently from Gauss. His works remained largely unnoticed by the scientific community, until in 1871 they were "rediscovered" by Abbe.
In the middle of the 19th century Maxwell demonstrated that the normal distribution is not just a convenient mathematical tool, but may also occur in natural phenomena: "The number of particles whose velocity, resolved in a certain direction, lies between "x" and "x" + "dx" is
Naming.
Since its introduction, the normal distribution has been known by many different names: the law of error, the law of facility of errors, Laplace's second law, Gaussian law, etc. Gauss himself apparently coined the term with reference to the "normal equations" involved in its applications, with normal having its technical meaning of orthogonal rather than "usual". However, by the end of the 19th century some authors had started using the name "normal distribution", where the word "normal" was used as an adjective – the term now being seen as a reflection of the fact that this distribution was seen as typical, common – and thus "normal". Peirce (one of those authors) once defined "normal" thus: "...the 'normal' is not the average (or any other kind of mean) of what actually occurs, but of what "would", in the long run, occur under certain circumstances." Around the turn of the 20th century Pearson popularized the term "normal" as a designation for this distribution.
Also, it was Pearson who first wrote the distribution in terms of the standard deviation "σ" as in modern notation. Soon after this, in year 1915, Fisher added the location parameter to the formula for normal distribution, expressing it in the way it is written nowadays:
The term "standard normal", which denotes the normal distribution with zero mean and unit variance came into general use around the 1950s, appearing in the popular textbooks by P.G. Hoel (1947) ""Introduction to mathematical statistics" and A.M. Mood (1950) "Introduction to the theory of statistics"".

