
"Ozymandias" ( ) is a sonnet written by the English Romantic poet Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822). It was first published in the 11 January 1818 issue of "The Examiner" of London. The poem was included the following year in Shelley's collection "Rosalind and Helen, A Modern Eclogue; with Other Poems," and in a posthumous compilation of his poems published in 1826.
Shelley wrote the poem in friendly competition with his friend and fellow poet Horace Smith (1779–1849), who also wrote a sonnet on the same topic with the same title. The poem explores the fate of history and the ravages of time: even the greatest men and the empires they forge are impermanent, their legacies fated to decay into oblivion.
Origin.
In antiquity, Ozymandias () was a Greek name for the Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses II.
Shelley began writing his poem in 1817, soon after the British Museum's announcement that they had acquired a large fragment of a statue of Ramesses II from the 13th century BCE; some scholars believe Shelley was inspired by the acquisition. The fragment of the statue's head and torso had been removed in 1816 from the mortuary temple of Ramesses (the Ramesseum) at Thebes by the Italian adventurer Giovanni Battista Belzoni. It had been expected to arrive in London in 1818, but did not arrive until 1821.
The poems, published before the statue arrived in Britain, may have been inspired by the impending arrival in London in 1821 of a colossal statue of Ramesses II. The statue's repute in Western Europe preceded its arrival: Napoleon had tried to acquire it for France after his 1798 expedition to Egypt.
The book "Les Ruines, ou méditations sur les révolutions des empires" (1791) by Constantin François Chasseboeuf, comte de Volney (1757-1820), first published in an English translation as "The Ruins, or a Survey of the Revolutions of Empires" (London: Joseph Johnson, 1792) by James Marshall, was an influence on Shelley. Shelley had explored similar themes in his 1813 work "Queen Mab".
Shelley typically published his works anonymously or using a pseudonym. He published the poem under the name "Glirastes," created by combining the Latin "glīs" (genetive "glīris"), meaning "dormouse", with the Greek suffix ἐραστής ("erastēs", "lover"). The name was a reference to his wife Mary, whose nickname was "do[o]rmouse".
Writing, publication and text.
Publication history.
The banker and political writer Horace Smith spent the Christmas season of 1817–1818 with Percy Bysshe Shelley and Mary Shelley. At this time, members of the Shelleys' literary circle would sometimes challenge each other to write competing sonnets on a common subject: Shelley, John Keats and Leigh Hunt wrote competing sonnets about the Nile around the same time. Shelley and Smith both chose a passage from the writings of the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus in "Bibliotheca historica", which described a massive Egyptian statue and quoted its inscription: "King of Kings Ozymandias am I. If any want to know how great I am and where I lie, let him outdo me in my work." In Shelley's poem, Diodorus becomes "a traveller from an antique land."
The poem was printed in "The Examiner", a weekly paper published by Leigh's brother John Hunt in London. Hunt admired Shelley's poetry and many of his other works, such as "The Revolt of Islam", were published in "The Examiner".
Shelley's poem was published on 11 January 1818 under the pen name "Glirastes". It appeared on page 24 in the yearly collection, under Original Poetry. Shelley's poem was later republished under the title "Sonnet. Ozymandias" in his 1819 collection "Rosalind and Helen, A Modern Eclogue; with Other Poems" by Charles and James Ollier and in the 1826 "Miscellaneous and Posthumous Poems of Percy Bysshe Shelley" by William Benbow, both in London.
Analysis and interpretation.
Form.
Shelley's "Ozymandias" is a sonnet, written in iambic pentameter, but with an atypical rhyme scheme (ABABA CDCEDEFEF) when compared to other English-language Petrarchan sonnets, and without the characteristic octave-and-sestet structure.
Hubris.
Two themes of the "Ozymandias" poems are the inevitable decline of rulers and their pretensions to greatness. 
The name "Ozymandias" is a rendering in Greek of part of Ramesses II's throne name, "User-maat-re Step-en-re".

