
Prolog is a logic programming language associated with artificial intelligence and computational linguistics.
Prolog has its roots in first-order logic, a formal logic, and unlike many other programming languages, Prolog is intended primarily as a declarative programming language: the program logic is expressed in terms of relations, represented as facts and rules. A computation is initiated by running a "query" over these relations.
The language was developed and implemented in Marseille, France, in 1972 by Alain Colmerauer with Philippe Roussel, based on Robert Kowalski's procedural interpretation of Horn clauses.
Prolog was one of the first logic programming languages and remains the most popular such language today, with several free and commercial implementations available. The language has been used for theorem proving, expert systems, term rewriting, type systems, and automated planning, as well as its original intended field of use, natural language processing. Modern Prolog environments support the creation of graphical user interfaces, as well as administrative and networked applications.
Prolog is well-suited for specific tasks that benefit from rule-based logical queries such as searching databases, voice control systems, and filling templates.
Syntax and semantics.
In Prolog, program logic is expressed in terms of relations, and a computation is initiated by running a "query" over these relations. Relations and queries are constructed using Prolog's single data type, the "term". Relations are defined by "clauses". Given a query, the Prolog engine attempts to find a resolution refutation of the negated query. If the negated query can be refuted, i.e., an instantiation for all free variables is found that makes the union of clauses and the singleton set consisting of the negated query false, it follows that the original query, with the found instantiation applied, is a logical consequence of the program. This makes Prolog (and other logic programming languages) particularly useful for database, symbolic mathematics, and language parsing applications. Because Prolog allows impure predicates, checking the truth value of certain special predicates may have some deliberate side effect, such as printing a value to the screen. Because of this, the programmer is permitted to use some amount of conventional imperative programming when the logical paradigm is inconvenient. It has a purely logical subset, called "pure Prolog", as well as a number of extralogical features.
Data types.
Prolog's single data type is the "term". Terms are either "atoms", "numbers", "variables" or "compound terms".
Special cases of compound terms:
ISO Prolog provides the codice_11, codice_12, codice_13, and codice_14 predicates for type-checking.
Rules and facts.
Prolog programs describe relations, defined by means of clauses. Pure Prolog is restricted to Horn clauses. There are two types of clauses: facts and rules. A rule is of the form
Head :- Body.
and is read as "Head is true if Body is true". A rule's body consists of calls to predicates, which are called the rule's goals. The built-in logical operator codice_15 (meaning an arity 2 operator with name codice_16) denotes conjunction of goals, and codice_17 denotes disjunction. Conjunctions and disjunctions can only appear in the body, not in the head of a rule.
Clauses with empty bodies are called facts. An example of a fact is:
cat(crookshanks).
which is equivalent to the rule:
cat(crookshanks) :- true.
The built-in predicate codice_18 is always true.
Given the above fact, one can ask:
"is crookshanks a cat?"
 ?- cat(crookshanks).
 Yes
"what things are cats?"
 ?- cat(X).
 X = crookshanks
Clauses with bodies are called rules. An example of a rule is:
animal(X) :- cat(X).
If we add that rule and ask "what things are animals?"
 ?- animal(X).
 X = crookshanks
Due to the relational nature of many built-in predicates, they can typically be used in several directions. For example, codice_19 can be used to determine the length of a list (codice_20, given a list codice_21) as well as to generate a list skeleton of a given length (codice_22), and also to generate both list skeletons and their lengths together (codice_23). Similarly, codice_24 can be used both to append two lists (codice_25 given lists codice_26 and codice_27) as well as to split a given list into parts (codice_28, given a list codice_21). For this reason, a comparatively small set of library predicates suffices for many Prolog programs.
As a general purpose language, Prolog also provides various built-in predicates to perform routine activities like input/output, using graphics and otherwise communicating with the operating system. These predicates are not given a relational meaning and are only useful for the side-effects they exhibit on the system. For example, the predicate codice_30 displays a term on the screen.
Execution.
Execution of a Prolog program is initiated by the user's posting of a single goal, called the query. Logically, the Prolog engine tries to find a resolution refutation of the negated query. The resolution method used by Prolog is called SLD resolution. If the negated query can be refuted, it follows that the query, with the appropriate variable bindings in place, is a logical consequence of the program. In that case, all generated variable bindings are reported to the user, and the query is said to have succeeded. Operationally, Prolog's execution strategy can be thought of as a generalization of function calls in other languages, one difference being that multiple clause heads can match a given call. In that case, the system creates a choice-point, unifies the goal with the clause head of the first alternative, and continues with the goals of that first alternative. If any goal fails in the course of executing the program, all variable bindings that were made since the most recent choice-point was created are undone, and execution continues with the next alternative of that choice-point. This execution strategy is called chronological backtracking. For example:
mother_child(trude, sally).
father_child(tom, sally).
father_child(tom, erica).
father_child(mike, tom).
sibling(X, Y) :- parent_child(Z, X), parent_child(Z, Y).
parent_child(X, Y) :- father_child(X, Y).
parent_child(X, Y) :- mother_child(X, Y).
This results in the following query being evaluated as true:
 ?- sibling(sally, erica).
 Yes
This is obtained as follows: Initially, the only matching clause-head for the query codice_31 is the first one, so proving the query is equivalent to proving the body of that clause with the appropriate variable bindings in place, i.e., the conjunction codice_32. The next goal to be proved is the leftmost one of this conjunction, i.e., codice_33. Two clause heads match this goal. The system creates a choice-point and tries the first alternative, whose body is codice_34. This goal can be proved using the fact codice_35, so the binding codice_36 is generated, and the next goal to be proved is the second part of the above conjunction: codice_37. Again, this can be proved by the corresponding fact. Since all goals could be proved, the query succeeds. Since the query contained no variables, no bindings are reported to the user. A query with variables, like:
?- father_child(Father, Child).
enumerates all valid answers on backtracking.
Notice that with the code as stated above, the query codice_38 also succeeds. One would insert additional goals to describe the relevant restrictions, if desired.
Loops and recursion.
Iterative algorithms can be implemented by means of recursive predicates.
Negation.
The built-in Prolog predicate codice_39 provides negation as failure, which allows for non-monotonic reasoning. The goal codice_40 in the rule
legal(X) :- \+ illegal(X).
is evaluated as follows: Prolog attempts to prove codice_41. If a proof for that goal can be found, the original goal (i.e., codice_40) fails. If no proof can be found, the original goal succeeds. Therefore, the codice_39 prefix operator is called the "not provable" operator, since the query codice_44 succeeds if Goal is not provable. This kind of negation is sound if its argument is "ground" (i.e. contains no variables). Soundness is lost if the argument contains variables and the proof procedure is complete. In particular, the query codice_45 now cannot be used to enumerate all things that are legal.
Programming in Prolog.
In Prolog, loading code is referred to as "consulting". Prolog can be used interactively by entering queries at the Prolog prompt codice_46. If there is no solution, Prolog writes codice_47. If a solution exists then it is printed. If there are multiple solutions to the query, then these can be requested by entering a semi-colon codice_48. There are guidelines on good programming practice to improve code efficiency, readability and maintainability.
Here follow some example programs written in Prolog.
Hello World.
An example of a query:
?- write('Hello World!'), nl.
Hello World!
true.
Compiler optimization.
Any computation can be expressed declaratively as a sequence of state transitions. As an example, an optimizing compiler with three optimization passes could be implemented as a relation between an initial program and its optimized form:
program_optimized(Prog0, Prog) :-
 optimization_pass_1(Prog0, Prog1),
 optimization_pass_2(Prog1, Prog2),
 optimization_pass_3(Prog2, Prog).
or equivalently using DCG notation:
program_optimized --&gt; optimization_pass_1, optimization_pass_2, optimization_pass_3.
Quicksort.
The quicksort sorting algorithm, relating a list to its sorted version:
partition([], _, [], []).
partition([X|Xs], Pivot, Smalls, Bigs) :-
 ( X @&lt; Pivot -&gt;
 Smalls = [X|Rest],
 partition(Xs, Pivot, Rest, Bigs)
 ; Bigs = [X|Rest],
 partition(Xs, Pivot, Smalls, Rest)
 
quicksort([]) --&gt; [].
quicksort([X|Xs]) --&gt;
 { partition(Xs, X, Smaller, Bigger) },
 quicksort(Smaller), [X], quicksort(Bigger).
Design patterns.
A design pattern is a general reusable solution to a commonly occurring problem in software design. Some design patterns in Prolog are skeletons, techniques, cliches, program schemata, logic description schemata, and higher order programming.
Higher-order programming.
A higher-order predicate is a predicate that takes one or more other predicates as arguments. Although support for higher-order programming takes Prolog outside the domain of first-order logic, which does not allow quantification over predicates, ISO Prolog now has some built-in higher-order predicates such as codice_49, codice_50, codice_51, codice_52, codice_53, and codice_54. Furthermore, since arbitrary Prolog goals can be constructed and evaluated at run-time, it is easy to write higher-order predicates like codice_55, which applies an arbitrary predicate to each member of a given list, and codice_56, which filters elements that satisfy a given predicate, also allowing for currying.
To convert solutions from temporal representation (answer substitutions on backtracking) to spatial representation (terms), Prolog has various all-solutions predicates that collect all answer substitutions of a given query in a list. This can be used for list comprehension. For example, perfect numbers equal the sum of their proper divisors:
 perfect(N) :-
 between(1, inf, N), U is N // 2,
 findall(D, (between(1,U,D), N mod D =:= 0), Ds),
 sumlist(Ds, N).
This can be used to enumerate perfect numbers, and also to check whether a number is perfect.
As another example, the predicate codice_57 applies a predicate codice_58 to all corresponding positions in a pair of lists:
maplist(_, [], []).
maplist(P, [X|Xs], [Y|Ys]) :-
 call(P, X, Y),
 maplist(P, Xs, Ys).
When codice_58 is a predicate that for all codice_60, codice_61 unifies codice_62 with a single unique value, codice_63 is equivalent to applying the map function in functional programming as codice_64.
Higher-order programming style in Prolog was pioneered in HiLog and λProlog.
Modules.
For programming in the large, Prolog provides a module system. The module system is standardised by ISO. However, not all Prolog compilers support modules, and there are compatibility problems between the module systems of the major Prolog compilers. Consequently, modules written on one Prolog compiler will not necessarily work on others.
Parsing.
There is a special notation called definite clause grammars (DCGs). A rule defined via codice_65 instead of codice_66 is expanded by the preprocessor (codice_67, a facility analogous to macros in other languages) according to a few straightforward rewriting rules, resulting in ordinary Prolog clauses. Most notably, the rewriting equips the predicate with two additional arguments, which can be used to implicitly thread state around, analogous to monads in other languages. DCGs are often used to write parsers or list generators, as they also provide a convenient interface to difference lists.
Meta-interpreters and reflection.
Prolog is a homoiconic language and provides many facilities for reflection. Its implicit execution strategy makes it possible to write a concise meta-circular evaluator (also called "meta-interpreter") for pure Prolog code:
solve(true).
solve((Subgoal1,Subgoal2)) :- 
 solve(Subgoal1),
 solve(Subgoal2).
solve(Head) :- 
 clause(Head, Body),
 solve(Body).
where codice_68 represents an empty conjunction, and codice_69 unifies with clauses in the database of the form codice_70.
Since Prolog programs are themselves sequences of Prolog terms (codice_66 is an infix operator) that are easily read and inspected using built-in mechanisms (like codice_72), it is possible to write customized interpreters that augment Prolog with domain-specific features. For example, Sterling and Shapiro present a meta-interpreter that performs reasoning with uncertainty, reproduced here with slight modifications:
solve(true, 1) :- !.
solve((Subgoal1,Subgoal2), Certainty) :-
 solve(Subgoal1, Certainty1),
 solve(Subgoal2, Certainty2),
 Certainty is min(Certainty1, Certainty2).
solve(Goal, 1) :-
 builtin(Goal), !, 
 Goal.
solve(Head, Certainty) :-
 clause_cf(Head, Body, Certainty1),
 solve(Body, Certainty2),
 Certainty is Certainty1 * Certainty2.
This interpreter uses a table of built-in Prolog predicates of the form
builtin(A is B).
builtin(read(X)).
% etc.
and clauses represented as codice_73. Given those, it can be called as codice_74 to execute codice_75 and obtain a measure of certainty about the result.
Turing completeness.
Pure Prolog is based on a subset of first-order predicate logic, Horn clauses, which is Turing-complete. Turing completeness of Prolog can be shown by using it to simulate a Turing machine:
turing(Tape0, Tape) :-
 perform(q0, [], Ls, Tape0, Rs),
 reverse(Ls, Ls1),
 append(Ls1, Rs, Tape).
perform(qf, Ls, Ls, Rs, Rs) :- !.
perform(Q0, Ls0, Ls, Rs0, Rs) :-
 symbol(Rs0, Sym, RsRest),
 once(rule(Q0, Sym, Q1, NewSym, Action)),
 action(Action, Ls0, Ls1, [NewSym|RsRest], Rs1),
 perform(Q1, Ls1, Ls, Rs1, Rs).
symbol([], b, []).
symbol([Sym|Rs], Sym, Rs).
action(left, Ls0, Ls, Rs0, Rs) :- left(Ls0, Ls, Rs0, Rs).
action(stay, Ls, Ls, Rs, Rs).
action(right, Ls0, [Sym|Ls0], [Sym|Rs], Rs).
left([], [], Rs0, [b|Rs0]).
left([L|Ls], Ls, Rs, [L|Rs]).
A simple example Turing machine is specified by the facts:
rule(q0, 1, q0, 1, right).
rule(q0, b, qf, 1, stay).
This machine performs incrementation by one of a number in unary encoding: It loops over any number of "1" cells and appends an additional "1" at the end. Example query and result:
?- turing([1,1,1], Ts).
Ts = [1, 1, 1, 1] ;
This illustrates how any computation can be expressed declaratively as a sequence of state transitions, implemented in Prolog as a relation between successive states of interest.
Implementation.
ISO Prolog.
The ISO Prolog standard consists of two parts. ISO/IEC 13211-1, published in 1995, aims to standardize the existing practices of the many implementations of the core elements of Prolog. It has clarified aspects of the language that were previously ambiguous and leads to portable programs. There are three corrigenda: Cor.1:2007, Cor.2:2012, and Cor.3:2017. ISO/IEC 13211-2, published in 2000, adds support for modules to the standard. The standard is maintained by the ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG17 working group. ANSI X3J17 is the US Technical Advisory Group for the standard.
Compilation.
For efficiency, Prolog code is typically compiled to abstract machine code, often influenced by the register-based Warren Abstract Machine (WAM) instruction set. Some implementations employ abstract interpretation to derive type and mode information of predicates at compile time, or compile to real machine code for high performance. Devising efficient implementation methods for Prolog code is a field of active research in the logic programming community, and various other execution methods are employed in some implementations. These include clause binarization and stack-based virtual machines.
Tail recursion.
Prolog systems typically implement a well-known optimization method called tail call optimization (TCO) for deterministic predicates exhibiting tail recursion or, more generally, tail calls: A clause's stack frame is discarded before performing a call in a tail position. Therefore, deterministic tail-recursive predicates are executed with constant stack space, like loops in other languages.
Term indexing.
Finding clauses that are unifiable with a term in a query is linear in the number of clauses. Term indexing uses a data structure that enables sub-linear-time lookups. Indexing only affects program performance, it does not affect semantics. Most Prologs only use indexing on the first term, as indexing on all terms is expensive, but techniques based on "field-encoded words" or "superimposed codewords" provide fast indexing across the full query and head.
Hashing.
Some Prolog systems, such as WIN-PROLOG and SWI-Prolog, now implement hashing to help handle large datasets more efficiently. This tends to yield very large performance gains when working with large corpora such as WordNet.
Tabling.
Some Prolog systems, (B-Prolog, XSB, SWI-Prolog, YAP, and Ciao), implement a memoization method called "tabling", which frees the user from manually storing intermediate results. Tabling is a space–time tradeoff; execution time can be reduced by using more memory to store intermediate results:
Subgoals encountered in a query evaluation are maintained in a table, along with answers to these subgoals. If a subgoal is re-encountered, the evaluation reuses information from the table rather than re-performing resolution against program clauses.
Tabling can be extended in various directions. It can support recursive predicates through SLG-resolution or linear tabling. In a multi-threaded Prolog system tabling results could be kept private to a thread or shared among all threads. And in incremental tabling, tabling might react to changes.
Implementation in hardware.
During the Fifth Generation Computer Systems project, there were attempts to implement Prolog in hardware with the aim of achieving faster execution with dedicated architectures. Furthermore, Prolog has a number of properties that may allow speed-up through parallel execution. A more recent approach has been to compile restricted Prolog programs to a field programmable gate array. However, rapid progress in general-purpose hardware has consistently overtaken more specialised architectures.
Limitations.
Although Prolog is widely used in research and education, Prolog and other logic programming languages have not had a significant impact on the computer industry in general. Most applications are small by industrial standards, with few exceeding 100,000 lines of code. Programming in the large is considered to be complicated because not all Prolog compilers support modules, and there are compatibility problems between the module systems of the major Prolog compilers. Portability of Prolog code across implementations has also been a problem, but developments since 2007 have meant: "the portability within the family of Edinburgh/Quintus derived Prolog implementations is good enough to allow for maintaining portable real-world applications."
Software developed in Prolog has been criticised for having a high performance penalty compared to conventional programming languages. In particular, Prolog's non-deterministic evaluation strategy can be problematic when programming deterministic computations, or when even using "don't care non-determinism" (where a single choice is made instead of backtracking over all possibilities). Cuts and other language constructs may have to be used to achieve desirable performance, destroying one of Prolog's main attractions, the ability to run programs "backwards and forwards".
Prolog is not purely declarative: because of constructs like the cut operator, a procedural reading of a Prolog program is needed to understand it. The order of clauses in a Prolog program is significant, as the execution strategy of the language depends on it. Other logic programming languages, such as Datalog, are truly declarative but restrict the language. As a result, many practical Prolog programs are written to conform to Prolog's depth-first search order, rather than as purely declarative logic programs.
Extensions.
Various implementations have been developed from Prolog to extend logic programming capabilities in numerous directions. These include types, modes, constraint logic programming (CLP), object-oriented logic programming (OOLP), concurrency, linear logic (LLP), functional and higher-order logic programming capabilities, plus interoperability with knowledge bases:
Types.
Prolog is an untyped language. Attempts to introduce types date back to the 1980s, and as of 2008 there are still attempts to extend Prolog with types. Type information is useful not only for type safety but also for reasoning about Prolog programs.&lt;ref name="cite doi|10.1007/BF01213601"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
Modes.
The syntax of Prolog does not specify which arguments of a predicate are inputs and which are outputs. However, this information is significant and it is recommended that it be included in the comments. Modes provide valuable information when reasoning about Prolog programs and can also be used to accelerate execution.
Constraints.
Constraint logic programming extends Prolog to include concepts from constraint satisfaction. A constraint logic program allows constraints in the body of clauses, such as: codice_76 It is suited to large-scale combinatorial optimisation problems and is thus useful for applications in industrial settings, such as automated time-tabling and production scheduling. Most Prolog systems ship with at least one constraint solver for finite domains, and often also with solvers for other domains like rational numbers.
Object-orientation.
Flora-2 is an object-oriented knowledge representation and reasoning system based on F-logic and incorporates HiLog, Transaction logic, and defeasible reasoning.
Logtalk is an object-oriented logic programming language that can use most Prolog implementations as a back-end compiler. As a multi-paradigm language, it includes support for both prototypes and classes.
Oblog is a small, portable, object-oriented extension to Prolog by Margaret McDougall of EdCAAD, University of Edinburgh.
Objlog was a frame-based language combining objects and Prolog II from CNRS, Marseille, France.
Prolog++ was developed by Logic Programming Associates and first released in 1989 for MS-DOS PCs. Support for other platforms was added, and a second version was released in 1995. A book about Prolog++ by Chris Moss was published by Addison-Wesley in 1994.
Visual Prolog is a multi-paradigm language with interfaces, classes, implementations and object expressions.
Graphics.
Prolog systems that provide a graphics library are SWI-Prolog, Visual Prolog, WIN-PROLOG, and B-Prolog.
Concurrency.
Prolog-MPI is an open-source SWI-Prolog extension for distributed computing over the Message Passing Interface. Also there are various concurrent Prolog programming languages.
Web programming.
Some Prolog implementations, notably Visual Prolog, SWI-Prolog and Ciao, support server-side web programming with support for web protocols, HTML and XML. There are also extensions to support semantic web formats such as RDF and OWL. Prolog has also been suggested as a client-side language. In addition Visual Prolog supports JSON-RPC and Websockets.
Adobe Flash.
Cedar is a free and basic Prolog interpreter. From version 4 and above Cedar has a FCA (Flash Cedar App) support. This provides a new platform to programming in Prolog through ActionScript.
Interfaces to other languages.
Frameworks exist which can bridge between Prolog and other languages:
History.
The name "Prolog" was chosen by Philippe Roussel as an abbreviation for "" (French for "programming in logic"). It was created around 1972 by Alain Colmerauer with Philippe Roussel, based on Robert Kowalski's procedural interpretation of Horn clauses. It was motivated in part by the desire to reconcile the use of logic as a declarative knowledge representation language with the procedural representation of knowledge that was popular in North America in the late 1960s and early 1970s. According to Robert Kowalski, the first Prolog system was developed in 1972 by Colmerauer and Phillipe Roussel. The first implementation of Prolog was an interpreter written in Fortran by Gerard Battani and Henri Meloni. David H. D. Warren took this interpreter to Edinburgh, and there implemented an alternative front-end, which came to define the “Edinburgh Prolog” syntax used by most modern implementations. Warren also implemented the first compiler for Prolog, creating the influential DEC-10 Prolog in collaboration with Fernando Pereira. Warren later generalised the ideas behind DEC-10 Prolog, to create the Warren Abstract Machine.
European AI researchers favored Prolog while Americans favored Lisp, reportedly causing many nationalistic debates on the merits of the languages. Much of the modern development of Prolog came from the impetus of the Fifth Generation Computer Systems project (FGCS), which developed a variant of Prolog named "Kernel Language" for its first operating system.
Pure Prolog was originally restricted to the use of a resolution theorem prover with Horn clauses of the form:
 H :- B1, ..., Bn.
The application of the theorem-prover treats such clauses as procedures:
 to show/solve H, show/solve B1 and ... and Bn.
Pure Prolog was soon extended, however, to include negation as failure, in which negative conditions of the form not(Bi) are shown by trying and failing to solve the corresponding positive conditions Bi.
Subsequent extensions of Prolog by the original team introduced constraint logic programming abilities into the implementations.
Use in industry.
Prolog has been used in Watson. Watson uses IBM's DeepQA software and the Apache UIMA (Unstructured Information Management Architecture) framework. The system was written in various languages, including Java, C++, and Prolog, and runs on the SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 11 operating system using Apache Hadoop framework to provide distributed computing. Prolog is used for pattern matching over natural language parse trees. The developers have stated: "We required a language in which we could conveniently express pattern matching rules over the parse trees and other annotations (such as named entity recognition results), and a technology that could execute these rules very efficiently. We found that Prolog was the ideal choice for the language due to its simplicity and expressiveness." Prolog is being used in the Low-Code Development Platform GeneXus, which is focused around AI. Open source graph database TerminusDB is implemented in prolog. TerminusDB is designed for collaboratively building and curating knowledge graphs.

