
Patricia Monique Soltysik (May 17, 1950 – May 17, 1974) was an American woman, best known as one of the founders of the Symbionese Liberation Army.
Early life.
Patricia Soltysik was the daughter of a pharmacist, the third of seven children, the eldest of five girls. She grew up in Goleta, California, and graduated from Dos Pueblos High School in 1968 in the top 10 percent of her class and was the student body treasurer of her high school.
She enrolled in the University of California, Berkeley on a state scholarship in 1968. While at Berkeley she became embittered by the "Bloody Thursday" incident where a protester was killed. Drifting into radical groups she became a radical feminist and self-avowed revolutionary. When her brother asked about her plans of becoming a lawyer, she replied, "Sisters, none of us are free until we are all free." In 1971 she attached herself to the radical ex-convict group United Prisoners Union and dropped out of school. She and her neighbor, Camilla Hall, became lovers, and it was Hall who gave Soltysik the name "Mizmoon."
SLA is born.
On March 5, 1973, Donald DeFreeze escaped from prison and future SLA members Russ Little and Willie Wolfe took him to Soltysik's house because unlike their other associates, Soltysik hadn't visited the prisons. The two became lovers and Soltysik and DeFreeze created the first SLA literature.
On November 6, 1973 in Oakland, California, two members of the SLA murdered superintendent of schools Dr. Marcus Foster and badly wounded his deputy Robert Blackburn as the men left an Oakland school board meeting. The SLA mistakenly believed Foster supported the introduction of identification cards into Oakland schools, condemning him as "fascist". It was later revealed that Soltysik and Emily Harris were the two who shot Marcus Foster according to Patty Hearst's sworn testimony.
L.A. shootout and death.
Soltysik was one of the six SLA members killed in a shootout with Los Angeles Police Department on May 17, 1974. She was found underneath the floor of the house in a crawl space. She died from smoke inhalation, burn injuries, and several gunshot wounds as the house burned down around her.

