
In mathematics, especially in order theory, a preorder or quasiorder is a binary relation that is reflexive and transitive. Preorders are more general than equivalence relations and (non-strict) partial orders, both of which are special cases of a preorder: an antisymmetric preorder is a partial order, and a symmetric preorder is an equivalence relation.
The name "preorder" comes from the idea that preorders (that are not partial orders) are 'almost' (partial) orders, but not quite; they are neither necessarily antisymmetric nor asymmetric. Because a preorder is a binary relation, the symbol ≤ can be used as the notational device for the relation. However, because they are not necessarily antisymmetric, some of the ordinary intuition associated to the symbol ≤ may not apply. On the other hand, a preorder can be used, in a straightforward fashion, to define a partial order and an equivalence relation. Doing so, however, is not always useful or worthwhile, depending on the problem domain being studied.
In words, when , one may say that "b" "covers" "a" or that "a" "precedes" "b", or that "b" "reduces" to "a". Occasionally, the notation ← or ≲ is used instead of ≤.
To every preorder, there corresponds a directed graph, with elements of the set corresponding to vertices, and the order relation between pairs of elements corresponding to the directed edges between vertices. The converse is not true: most directed graphs are neither reflexive nor transitive. In general, the corresponding graphs may contain cycles. A preorder that is antisymmetric no longer has cycles; it is a partial order, and corresponds to a directed acyclic graph. A preorder that is symmetric is an equivalence relation; it can be thought of as having lost the direction markers on the edges of the graph. In general, a preorder's corresponding directed graph may have many disconnected components.
Formal definition.
Consider a homogeneous relation formula_1 on some given set formula_2 so that by definition, formula_1 is some subset of formula_4 and the notation formula_5 is used in place of formula_6 Then formula_1 is called a ' or ' if it is reflexive and transitive; that is, if it satisfies:
A set that is equipped with a preorder is called a preordered set (or proset). 
For emphasis or contrast to strict preorders, a preorder may also be referred to as a non-strict preorder. 
If reflexivity is replaced with irreflexivity (while keeping transitivity) then the result is called a strict preorder; explicitly, a on formula_14 is a homogeneous binary relation formula_15 on formula_14 that is transitive and also satisfies the following condition:
Every strict partial order is (by definition) a strict preorder; conversely, because every transitive irreflexive relation is necessarily asymmetric, every strict preorder is also a strict partial order. 
Consequently, a binary relation is a strict preorder if and only if it is a strict partial order. Although they are equivalent, the term "strict partial order" is typically preferred over "strict preorder" and readers are referred to the article on strict partial orders for details about such relations. In contrast to strict preorders, there are many (non-strict) preorders that are (non-strict) partial orders. 
Related definitions.
If a preorder is also antisymmetric, that is, formula_5 and formula_18 implies formula_19 then it is a partial order.
On the other hand, if it is symmetric, that is, if formula_5 implies formula_21 then it is an equivalence relation.
A preorder is total if formula_5 or formula_18 for all formula_24
The notion of a preordered set formula_14 can be formulated in a categorical framework as a thin category; that is, as a category with at most one morphism from an object to another. Here the objects correspond to the elements of formula_2 and there is one morphism for objects which are related, zero otherwise. Alternately, a preordered set can be understood as an enriched category, enriched over the category .
A preordered class is a class equipped with a preorder. Every set is a class and so every preordered set is a preordered class.
Examples.
The reachability relationship in any directed graph (possibly containing cycles) gives rise to a preorder, where in the preorder if and only if there is a path from "x" to "y" in the directed graph. Conversely, every preorder is the reachability relationship of a directed graph (for instance, the graph that has an edge from "x" to "y" for every pair with ). However, many different graphs may have the same reachability preorder as each other. In the same way, reachability of directed acyclic graphs, directed graphs with no cycles, gives rise to partially ordered sets (preorders satisfying an additional antisymmetry property).
Every finite topological space gives rise to a preorder on its points by defining if and only if "x" belongs to every neighborhood of "y". Every finite preorder can be formed as the specialization preorder of a topological space in this way. That is, there is a one-to-one correspondence between finite topologies and finite preorders. However, the relation between infinite topological spaces and their specialization preorders is not one-to-one.
A net is a directed preorder, that is, each pair of elements has an upper bound. The definition of convergence via nets is important in topology, where preorders cannot be replaced by partially ordered sets without losing important features.
Further examples:
In computer science, one can find examples of the following preorders.
Example of a total preorder:
Uses.
Preorders play a pivotal role in several situations:
Constructions.
Every binary relation R on a set S can be extended to a preorder on S by taking the transitive closure and reflexive closure, R+=. The transitive closure indicates path connection in if and only if there is an R-path from "x" to y.
Given a preorder ≲ on S one may define an equivalence relation ~ on S such that if and only if and . (The resulting relation is reflexive since a preorder is reflexive, transitive by applying transitivity of the preorder twice, and symmetric by definition.)
Using this relation, it is possible to construct a partial order on the quotient set of the equivalence, , the set of all equivalence classes of ~. Note that if the preorder is , is the set of R-cycle equivalence classes: if and only if or "x" is in an R-cycle with "y". In any case, on , it is possible to define if and only if . By the construction of ~, this definition is independent of the chosen representatives and the corresponding relation is indeed well-defined. It is readily verified that this yields a partially ordered set.
Conversely, from a partial order on a partition of a set S one can construct a preorder on S. There is a 1-to-1 correspondence between preorders and pairs (partition, partial order).
For a preorder "≲", a relation "&lt;" can be defined as if and only if ( and not ), or equivalently, using the equivalence relation introduced above, ("a" ≲ "b" and not "a" ~ "b"). It is a strict partial order; every strict partial order can be the result of such a construction. If the preorder is antisymmetric, hence a partial order "≤", the equivalence is equality, so the relation "&lt;" can also be defined as if and only if ( and ).
The relation "&lt;" is defined as: if and only if ( and ). Doing so would cause problems if the preorder was not antisymmetric, as the resulting relation "&lt;" would not be transitive (think of how equivalent non-equal elements relate).
Conversely, if and only if or . This is the reason for using the notation "≲"; "≤" can be confusing for a preorder that is not antisymmetric, it may suggest that implies that or .
With this construction multiple preorders "≲" can give the same relation "&lt;", so without more information, such as the equivalence relation, "≲" cannot be reconstructed from "&lt;". Possible preorders include the following:
Given a binary relation formula_27, the complemented composition formula_28 forms a preorder called the left residual, where formula_29 denotes the converse relation of formula_27, and formula_31 denotes the complement relation of formula_27, while formula_33 denotes relation composition.
Number of preorders.
As explained above, there is a 1-to-1 correspondence between preorders and pairs (partition, partial order). Thus the number of preorders is the sum of the number of partial orders on every partition. For example:
Interval.
For , the interval is the set of points "x" satisfying and , also written . It contains at least the points "a" and "b". One may choose to extend the definition to all pairs . The extra intervals are all empty.
Using the corresponding strict relation "&lt;", one can also define the interval as the set of points "x" satisfying and , also written . An open interval may be empty even if .
Also and can be defined similarly.

