
Pell's equation, also called the Pell–Fermat equation, is any Diophantine equation of the form formula_1 where "n" is a given positive nonsquare integer and integer solutions are sought for "x" and "y". In Cartesian coordinates, the equation is represented by a hyperbola; solutions occur wherever the curve passes through a point whose "x" and "y" coordinates are both integers, such as the trivial solution with "x" = 1 and "y" = 0. Joseph Louis Lagrange proved that, as long as "n" is not a perfect square, Pell's equation has infinitely many distinct integer solutions. These solutions may be used to accurately approximate the square root of "n" by rational numbers of the form "x"/"y".
This equation was first studied extensively in India starting with Brahmagupta, who found an integer solution to formula_2 in his "Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta" circa 628. Bhaskara II in the twelfth century and Narayana Pandit in the fourteenth century both found general solutions to Pell's equation and other quadratic indeterminate equations. Bhaskara II is generally credited with developing the "chakravala" method, building on the work of Jayadeva and Brahmagupta. Solutions to specific examples of Pell's equation, such as the Pell numbers arising from the equation with "n" = 2, had been known for much longer, since the time of Pythagoras in Greece and a similar date in India. William Brouncker was the first European to solve Pell's equation. The name of Pell's equation arose from Leonhard Euler mistakenly attributing Brouncker's solution of the equation to John Pell.
History.
As early as 400 BC in India and Greece, mathematicians studied the numbers arising from the "n" = 2 case of Pell's equation,
and from the closely related equation
because of the connection of these equations to the square root of 2. Indeed, if "x" and "y" are positive integers satisfying this equation, then "x"/"y" is an approximation of . The numbers "x" and "y" appearing in these approximations, called side and diameter numbers, were known to the Pythagoreans, and Proclus observed that in the opposite direction these numbers obeyed one of these two equations. Similarly, Baudhayana discovered that "x" = 17, "y" = 12 and "x" = 577, "y" = 408 are two solutions to the Pell equation, and that 17/12 and 577/408 are very close approximations to the square root of 2.
Later, Archimedes approximated the square root of 3 by the rational number 1351/780. Although he did not explain his methods, this approximation may be obtained in the same way, as a solution to Pell's equation.
Likewise, Archimedes's cattle problem — an ancient word problem about finding the number of cattle belonging to the sun god Helios — can be solved by reformulating it as a Pell's equation. The manuscript containing the problem states that it was devised by Archimedes and recorded in a letter to Eratosthenes, and the attribution to Archimedes is generally accepted today.
Around AD 250, Diophantus considered the equation
where "a" and "c" are fixed numbers and "x" and "y" are the variables to be solved for.
This equation is different in form from Pell's equation but equivalent to it.
Diophantus solved the equation for ("a", "c") equal to (1, 1), (1, −1), (1, 12), and (3, 9). Al-Karaji, a 10th-century Persian mathematician, worked on similar problems to Diophantus.
In Indian mathematics, Brahmagupta discovered that
a form of what is now known as Brahmagupta's identity. Using this, he was able to "compose" triples formula_7 and formula_8 that were solutions of formula_9, to generate the new triples
Not only did this give a way to generate infinitely many solutions to formula_12 starting with one solution, but also, by dividing such a composition by formula_13, integer or "nearly integer" solutions could often be obtained. For instance, for formula_14, Brahmagupta composed the triple (10, 1, 8) (since formula_15) with itself to get the new triple (192, 20, 64). Dividing throughout by 64 ('8' for formula_16 and formula_17) gave the triple (24, 5/2, 1), which when composed with itself gave the desired integer solution (1151, 120, 1). Brahmagupta solved many Pell equations with this method, proving that it gives solutions starting from an integer solution of formula_9 for "k" = ±1, ±2, or ±4.
The first general method for solving the Pell equation (for all "N") was given by Bhāskara II in 1150, extending the methods of Brahmagupta. Called the chakravala (cyclic) method, it starts by choosing two relatively prime integers formula_19 and formula_20, then composing the triple formula_21 (that is, one which satisfies formula_22) with the trivial triple formula_23 to get the triple formula_24, which can be scaled down to
When formula_26 is chosen so that formula_27 is an integer, so are the other two numbers in the triple. Among such formula_26, the method chooses one that minimizes formula_29, and repeats the process. This method always terminates with a solution (proved by Joseph-Louis Lagrange in 1768). Bhaskara used it to give the solution "x" = 1766319049, "y" = 226153980 to the "N" = 61 case.
Several European mathematicians rediscovered how to solve Pell's equation in the 17th century, apparently unaware that it had been solved almost five hundred years earlier in India. Pierre de Fermat found how to solve the equation and in a 1657 letter issued it as a challenge to English mathematicians. In a letter to Kenelm Digby, Bernard Frénicle de Bessy said that Fermat found the smallest solution for "N" up to 150, and challenged John Wallis to solve the cases "N" = 151 or 313. Both Wallis and William Brouncker gave solutions to these problems, though Wallis suggests in a letter that the solution was due to Brouncker.
John Pell's connection with the equation is that he revised Thomas Branker's translation of Johann Rahn's 1659 book "Teutsche Algebra" into English, with a discussion of Brouncker's solution of the equation. Leonhard Euler mistakenly thought that this solution was due to Pell, as a result of which he named the equation after Pell.
The general theory of Pell's equation, based on continued fractions and algebraic manipulations with numbers of the form formula_30 was developed by Lagrange in 1766–1769.
Solutions.
Fundamental solution via continued fractions.
Let formula_31 denote the sequence of convergents to the regular continued fraction for formula_32. This sequence is unique. Then the pair ("x"1,"y"1) solving Pell's equation and minimizing "x" satisfies "x"1 = "hi" and "y"1 = "ki" for some "i". This pair is called the "fundamental solution". Thus, the fundamental solution may be found by performing the continued fraction expansion and testing each successive convergent until a solution to Pell's equation is found.
The time for finding the fundamental solution using the continued fraction method, with the aid of the Schönhage–Strassen algorithm for fast integer multiplication, is within a logarithmic factor of the solution size, the number of digits in the pair ("x"1,"y"1). However, this is not a polynomial time algorithm because the number of digits in the solution may be as large as , far larger than a polynomial in the number of digits in the input value "n".
Additional solutions from the fundamental solution.
Once the fundamental solution is found, all remaining solutions may be calculated algebraically from
expanding the right side, equating coefficients of formula_32 on both sides, and equating the other terms on both sides. This yields the recurrence relations
Concise representation and faster algorithms.
Although writing out the fundamental solution ("x"1, "y"1) as a pair of binary numbers may require a large number of bits, it may in many cases be represented more compactly in the form
using much smaller integers "a""i", "b""i", and "c""i".
For instance, Archimedes' cattle problem is equivalent to the Pell equation formula_38, the fundamental solution of which has 206545 digits if written out explicitly. However, the solution is also equal to
where
and formula_41 and formula_42 only have 45 and 41 decimal digits, respectively.
Methods related to the quadratic sieve approach for integer factorization may be used to collect relations between prime numbers in the number field generated by , and to combine these relations to find a product representation of this type. The resulting algorithm for solving Pell's equation is more efficient than the continued fraction method, though it still takes more than polynomial time. Under the assumption of the generalized Riemann hypothesis, it can be shown to take time
where "N" = log "n" is the input size, similarly to the quadratic sieve.
Quantum algorithms.
Hallgren showed that a quantum computer can find a product representation, as described above, for the solution to Pell's equation in polynomial time. Hallgren's algorithm, which can be interpreted as an algorithm for finding the group of units of a real quadratic number field, was extended to more general fields by Schmidt and Völlmer.
Example.
As an example, consider the instance of Pell's equation for "n" = 7; that is,
The sequence of convergents for the square root of seven are
Therefore, the fundamental solution is formed by the pair (8, 3). Applying the recurrence formula to this solution generates the infinite sequence of solutions
The smallest solution can be very large. For example, the smallest solution to formula_45 is (32188120829134849, 1819380158564160), and this is the equation which Frenicle challenged Wallis to solve. Values of "n" such that the smallest solution of formula_46 is greater than the smallest solution for any smaller value of "n" are
The smallest solution of Pell equations.
The following is a list of the smallest solution (fundamental solution) to formula_47 with "n" ≤ 128. For square "n", there is no solution except (1, 0). The values of "x" are sequence and those of "y" are sequence in OEIS.
Connections.
Pell's equation has connections to several other important subjects in mathematics.
Algebraic number theory.
Pell's equation is closely related to the theory of algebraic numbers, as the formula
is the norm for the ring formula_49 and for the closely related quadratic field formula_50. Thus, a pair of integers formula_51 solves Pell's equation if and only if formula_52 is a unit with norm 1 in formula_49. Dirichlet's unit theorem, that all units of formula_49 can be expressed as powers of a single fundamental unit (and multiplication by a sign), is an algebraic restatement of the fact that all solutions to the Pell equation can be generated from the fundamental solution. The fundamental unit can in general be found by solving a Pell-like equation but it does not always correspond directly to the fundamental solution of Pell's equation itself, because the fundamental unit may have norm −1 rather than 1 and its coefficients may be half integers rather than integers.
Chebyshev polynomials.
Demeyer mentions a connection between Pell's equation and the Chebyshev polynomials:
If "Ti" ("x") and "Ui" ("x") are the Chebyshev polynomials of the first and second kind, respectively, then these polynomials satisfy a form of Pell's equation in any polynomial ring "R"["x"], with "n" = "x"2 − 1:
Thus, these polynomials can be generated by the standard technique for Pell equations of taking powers of a fundamental solution:
It may further be observed that, if ("xi","yi") are the solutions to any integer Pell equation, then "xi" = "Ti" ("x"1) and "yi" = "y"1"U""i" − 1("x"1).
Continued fractions.
A general development of solutions of Pell's equation formula_46 in terms of continued fractions of formula_32 can be presented, as the solutions "x" and "y" are approximates to the square root of "n" and thus are a special case of continued fraction approximations for quadratic irrationals.
The relationship to the continued fractions implies that the solutions to Pell's equation form a semigroup subset of the modular group. Thus, for example, if "p" and "q" satisfy Pell's equation, then
is a matrix of unit determinant. Products of such matrices take exactly the same form, and thus all such products yield solutions to Pell's equation. This can be understood in part to arise from the fact that successive convergents of a continued fraction share the same property: If "p""k"−1/"q""k"−1 and "p""k"/"q""k" are two successive convergents of a continued fraction, then the matrix
has determinant (−1)"k".
Smooth numbers.
Størmer's theorem applies Pell equations to find pairs of consecutive smooth numbers, positive integers whose prime factors are all smaller than a given value. As part of this theory, Størmer also investigated divisibility relations among solutions to Pell's equation; in particular, he showed that each solution other than the fundamental solution has a prime factor that does not divide "n".
The negative Pell equation.
The negative Pell equation is given by
It has also been extensively studied; it can be solved by the same method of continued fractions and will have solutions if and only if the period of the continued fraction has odd length. However it is not known which roots have odd period lengths and therefore not known when the negative Pell equation is solvable. A necessary (but not sufficient) condition for solvability is that "n" is not divisible by 4 or by a prime of form 4"k" + 3. Thus, for example, "x"2 − 3"ny"2 = −1 is never solvable, but "x"2 − 5"ny"2 = −1 may be.
The first few numbers "n" for which "x"2 − "ny"2 = −1 is solvable are
The proportion of square-free "n" divisible by "k" primes of the form 4"m" + 1 for which the negative Pell equation is solvable is at least 40%. If the negative Pell equation does have a solution for a particular "n", its fundamental solution leads to the fundamental one for the positive case by squaring both sides of the defining equation:
implies
As stated above, if the negative Pell equation is solvable, a solution can be found using the method of continued fractions as in the positive Pell's equation. The recursion relation works slightly differently however. Since formula_64, the next solution is determined in terms of formula_65 whenever there is a match, i.e. when k is odd. The resulting recursion relation is (modulo a minus sign which is immaterial due to the quadratic nature of the equation)
which gives an infinite tower of solutions to the negative Pell's equation.
Generalized Pell's equation.
The equation
is called the generalized (or general) Pell's equation. The equation formula_69 is the corresponding Pell's resolvent. A recursive algorithm was given by Lagrange in 1768 for solving the equation, reducing the problem to the case formula_70. Such solutions can be derived using the continued fractions method as outlined above.
If formula_71 is a solution to formula_68 and formula_73 is a solution to formula_74 then formula_75 such that formula_76 is a solution to formula_77, a principle named the "multiplicative principle".
Solutions to the generalized Pell's equation are used for solving certain Diophantine equations and units of certain rings, and they arise in the study of SIC-POVMs in quantum information theory.
The equation
is similar to the resolvent formula_79 in that if a minimal solution to formula_78 can be found then all solutions of the equation can be generated in a similar manner to the case formula_81. For certain formula_82, solutions to formula_79 can be generated from those with formula_78, in that if formula_85 then every third solution to formula_78 has "x,y" even, generating a solution to formula_79.

