
Politics of Saint Pierre and Miquelon takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic French overseas collectivity, whereby the President of the Territorial Council is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government.
Executive branch.
The head of state is President "Emmanuel Macron" of France as represented by "Préfet" (Prefect) Henri Jean (since 3 March 2016). The prefect is essentially the governor of the territory.
For more see: Prefect of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon.
Legislative branch.
The Territorial Council of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon (), which was known until February 22, 2007 as the General Council ("Conseil général"), has 19 members, elected for a three-year term in single seat constituencies. The council sits at the Territorial Council Building, a two-storey, two tone aqua colour building on St. Pierre.
Municipal Governments.
There are two levels of local government, Miquelon-Langlade and Saint-Pierre.
For more see Municipal governments in St. Pierre and Miquelon
Judicial Branch.
The judiciary of the territory consists of the Superior Tribunal of Appeals (Tribunal Superieur d'Appel).
The court resides at the Palais de Justice or Courthouse and are located at Church Square in St. Pierre.
Departments.
A list of departments of St. Pierre and Miquelon (some local branch of national departments):
Boundary dispute.
In 1992, a maritime boundary dispute with Canada over the delineation of the Exclusive Economic Zone belonging to France was settled by the International Court of Arbitration. In the decision, France kept the 12 nautical mile (NM) (22.2 km) territorial sea surrounding the islands and was given an additional 12 NM (22.2 km) contiguous zone as well as a 10.5 NM (19.4 km) wide corridor stretching 200 NM (370 km) south. The total area in the award was 18% of what France had requested.
The boundary dispute had been a flash point for Franco-Canadian relations. New claims made under UNCLOS by France over the continental shelf might cause new tensions between France and Canada.
International organization participation.
Franc Zone, World Federation of Trade Unions

