
Quantico (; formerly Potomac) is a town in Prince William County, Virginia, United States. The population was 480 at the 2010 census. Quantico is approximately 35 miles southwest of Washington, DC, bordered by the Potomac River to the east and the Quantico Creek to the north. The word Quantico is a derivation of the name of a Doeg village recorded by English colonists as "Pamacocack".
Quantico is surrounded on its remaining two sides by one of the largest U.S. Marine Corps bases, Marine Corps Base Quantico. The base is the site of the HMX-1 presidential helicopter squadron, the FBI Academy, the FBI Laboratory, the Marine Corps Combat Development Command, the Officer Candidates School, The Basic School, The United States Drug Enforcement Administration training academy, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, the United States Army Criminal Investigation Command, and the Air Force Office of Special Investigations headquarters. A replica of the United States Marine Corps War Memorial stands at one of the entrances to the base.
Geography.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which, of it is land and none of the area is covered with water.
Climate.
Quantico has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification "Cfa").
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 561 people, 295 households, and 107 families living in the town. The population density was . The racial makeup was 61.32% White, 20.32% African American, 10.16% Asian, 0.36% Native American, 2.32% from other races, and 5.53% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.53% of the population. The median income for a household in the town was $26,250. About 22.4% of families and 21.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 39.4% of those under the age of 18.
Transportation.
There are no significant highways passing through Quantico. All road vehicles must pass through Marine Corps Base Quantico in order to reach the town. Therefore, all vehicle drivers must present a valid driver's license to the military security officer stationed at the gate, and may be required to state their destination and reason for visiting. More thorough searches and checks may also be undertaken, according to the discretion and authority of base security.
Amtrak and Virginia Railway Express trains stop at the Quantico station.
Popular culture.
The headquarters of the FBI Academy at the Quantico Marine Corps Base are featured in the 1991 film "The Silence of the Lambs", the 2013-15 TV series "Hannibal", and the 2015–18 series "Quantico". The headquarters of the FBI Behavioral Analysis Unit are also featured in the 2005–20 series "Criminal Minds" and the 2017–19 series "Mindhunter".

