
The Reichsmarine () was the name of the German Navy during the Weimar Republic and first two years of Nazi Germany. It was the naval branch of the "Reichswehr", existing from 1919 to 1935. In 1935, it became known as the "Kriegsmarine (War Navy), a" branch of the "Wehrmacht"; a change implemented by Adolf Hitler. Many of the administrative and organizational tenets of the "Reichsmarine" were then carried over into the organization of the "Kriegsmarine".
"Vorläufige Reichsmarine".
The "Vorläufige Reichsmarine" () was formed after the end of World War I from the Imperial German Navy.
The provisions of the Treaty of Versailles restricted the German Navy to 15,000 men and no submarines, while the fleet was limited to six pre-dreadnought battleships, six light cruisers, twelve destroyers, and twelve torpedo boats. Replacements for the outdated battleships were restricted to a maximum size of 10,000 tons.
"Reichsmarine".
The "Reichsmarine" was considered the armed naval force of the "Reichswehrministerium" (Ministry of the Reichswehr) which was headed by a civilian minister appointed by the government of the Weimar Republic. The senior most naval officer was known until 1920 as the "Chef der Admiralität" (Chief of the Admiralty), after which the title changed to "Chef der Marineleitung" (Chief of the Naval Command).
Naval headquarters.
The naval commander oversaw a headquarters office known as the "Marinekommandiertenabteilung" which was headquartered in Berlin. The Naval Command also maintained a headquarters intelligence office ("Marinenachrichtenoffizier") and a naval archives. Internal to the naval headquarters five offices known as the:
The following officers served as head of the "Reichsmarine" from 1918 to 1935
Fleet command.
The fleet command of the Reichsmarine ("Flottenkommando") was headquartered at Kiel and consisted of a flag staff and fleet commander embarked on board the flagship of the German fleet. During the 1920s, the German flagship was the "SMS Schleswig-Holstein" with two naval officers serving as fleet commander, "Vizeadmiral" Hans Zenker and Konrad Mommsen, between 1923 and 1927. The fleet commander position was then left vacant, but the flag staff remained.
The purpose of fleet command was to oversee the four major type commanders of German naval vessels. These commands were in turn responsible for the administration of various German ship classes to include equipment development, vessel deployments, and personnel assignment. Once at sea, operational control of the vessels switched to the commanders of the two main Naval Sea Stations. The four type commands were:
Naval sea stations.
The Reichsmarine did not maintain traditional at-sea fleets, but instead assigned two geographical areas (known as "Marinestation") which oversaw all vessels operationally deployed in the North and Baltic Seas. Each naval station maintained a headquarters staff, general naval inspectorate, training department, artillery arsenal inspector, as well as a medical command unit. The naval stations also served as a senior officer for the commanders of the various German navy ports.
Naval stations of the Reichsmarine
Ships and equipment.
The Treaty of Versailles limited the size and armament of the "Reichsmarine" and prevented it from introducing new technologies. The restrictions were intended to prevent the German Navy from becoming a threat to the Allied powers. On the other hand, the Allies had made certain that the "Reichsmarine" would be in the foreseeable future the strongest power in the Baltic Sea, in order to serve as a counterweight against the new Soviet Union, which was viewed with distrust by the Allies.
Germany was only allowed eight battleships, six cruisers, twelve destroyers, and twelve torpedo boats. The "Reichsmarine" tried to meet the arms restrictions with secret armament and technical innovations such as the introduction of the pocket battleship.
List of "Reichsmarine" ships:

