
In Norse mythology, Ratatoskr (Old Norse, generally considered to mean "drill-tooth" or "bore-tooth") is a squirrel who runs up and down the world tree Yggdrasil to carry messages between the eagle perched atop Yggdrasil, and the serpent Níðhöggr, who dwells beneath one of the three roots of the tree. Ratatoskr is attested in the "Poetic Edda", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and the "Prose Edda", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson.
Etymology.
The name "Ratatoskr" contains two elements: "rata-" and "-toskr". The element "toskr" is generally held to mean "tusk". Guðbrandur Vigfússon theorized that the "rati-" element means "the traveller". He says that the name of the legendary drill Rati may feature the same term. According to Vigfússon, "Ratatoskr" means "tusk the traveller" or "the climber tusk."
Sophus Bugge theorized that the name "Ratatoskr" is a loanword from Old English meaning "Rat-tooth." Bugge's basis hinges on the fact that the "-toskr" element of the compound does not appear anywhere else in Old Norse. Bugge proposed that the "-toskr" element is a reformation of the Old English word "tūsc" (Old Frisian "tusk") and, in turn, that the element "Rata-" represents Old English "ræt" ("rat").
According to Albert Sturtevant, "[as] far as the element "Rata-" is concerned, Bugge's hypothesis has no valid foundation in view of the fact that the [Old Norse] word "Rata" (gen. form of "Rati"*) is used in "Háv[amál]" (106, 1) to signify the instrument which Odin employed for "boring" his way through the rocks in quest of the poet's mead [...]" and that ""Rati*" must then be considered a native [Old Norse] word meaning "The Borer, Gnawer" [...]".
Sturtevant says that Bugge's theory regarding the element "-toskr" may appear to be supported by the fact that the word does not appear elsewhere in Old Norse. Sturtevant, however, disagrees. Sturtevant says that the Old Norse proper name "Tunne" (derived from Proto-Norse "*Tunþē") refers to "a person who is characterized as having some peculiar sort of "tooth"" and theorizes a Proto-Germanic form of "-toskr". Sturtevant concludes that "the fact that the [Old Norse] word occurs only in the name "Rata-toskr" is no valid evidence against this assumption, for there are many [Old Norse] "hapax legomena" of native origin, as is attested by the equivalents in the Mod[ern] Scandinavian dialects." Modern scholars have accepted this etymology, listing the name "Ratatoskr" as meaning "drill-tooth" (Jesse Byock, Andy Orchard, Rudolf Simek) or "bore-tooth" (John Lindow).
Attestations.
In the "Poetic Edda" poem "Grímnismál", the god Odin (disguised as "Grímnir") says that Ratatoskr runs up and down Yggdrasil bringing messages between the eagle perched atop it and Níðhöggr below it:
Ratatoskr is described in the "Prose Edda"s "Gylfaginning" chapter 16, in which High states that
An eagle sits at the top of the ash, and it has knowledge of many things. Between its eyes sits the hawk called Vedrfolnir [...]. The squirrel called Ratatosk [...] runs up and down the ash. He tells slanderous gossip, provoking the eagle and Nidhogg.
Theories.
According to Rudolf Simek, "the squirrel probably only represents an embellishing detail to the mythological picture of the world-ash in "Grímnismál". Hilda Ellis Davidson, describing the world tree, states the squirrel is said to gnaw at it—furthering a continual destruction and re-growth cycle, and posits the tree symbolizes ever-changing existence. John Lindow points out that Yggdrasil is described as rotting on one side and as being chewed on by four harts and Níðhöggr, and that, according to the account in "Gylfaginning", it also bears verbal hostility in the fauna it supports. Lindow adds that "in the sagas, a person who helps stir up or keep feuds alive by ferrying words of malice between the participants is seldom one of high status, which may explain the assignment of this role in the mythology to a relatively insignificant animal".
Richard W. Thorington Jr. and Katie Ferrell theorize that "the role of Ratatosk probably derived from the habit of European tree squirrels ("Sciurus vulgaris") to give a scolding alarm call in response to danger. It takes little imagination for you to think that the squirrel is saying nasty things about you."
In popular culture.
Ratatoskr appears in the 2018 video game "God of War", where he has the ability to provide the player with healing items. 
He also appears as a playable character in the game "Smite". 
In the 2010 video game "Young Thor", Ratatoskr is depicted as an ally of Hel, who serves as the game's antagonist.
Ratatoskr also appears in the 2020 video game Assassin's Creed Valhalla, where he engages the player in flyting, a poetic duel, in the mythical realm of Jötunheimr.
In the comic book series "The Unbeatable Squirrel Girl", Ratatoskr is featured as a villainous female squirrel god from Asgard who wants to destroy all of humanity. She was defeated by Squirrel Girl after she teamed up with Thor and Loki. However, she later teamed up with Squirrel Girl to fight the Frost Giants.
Ratatoskr appears in the trading card game "" as ‘Toski, Bearer of Secrets’; a homage to the mythical creature. The card’s effects connote their tenacity to exchange information between the many realms of Kaldheim.
In the novel "Hammered", Atticus rides Ratatoskr to the top of Yggdrasil on his quest to steal the golden apples of Iðunn.

