
In complex analysis, the Riemann mapping theorem states that if "U" is a non-empty simply connected open subset of the complex number plane C which is not all of C, then there exists a biholomorphic mapping "f" (i.e. a bijective holomorphic mapping whose inverse is also holomorphic) from "U" onto the open unit disk 
This mapping is known as a Riemann mapping.
Intuitively, the condition that "U" be simply connected means that "U" does not contain any “holes”. The fact that "f" is biholomorphic implies that it is a conformal map and therefore angle-preserving. Intuitively, such a map preserves the shape of any sufficiently small figure, while possibly rotating and scaling (but not reflecting) it.
Henri Poincaré proved that the map "f" is essentially unique: if "z"0 is an element of "U" and φ is an arbitrary angle, then there exists precisely one "f" as above such that "f"("z"0) = 0 and such that the argument of the derivative of "f" at the point "z"0 is equal to φ. This is an easy consequence of the Schwarz lemma.
As a corollary of the theorem, any two simply connected open subsets of the Riemann sphere which both lack at least two points of the sphere can be conformally mapped into each other.
History.
The theorem was stated (under the assumption that the boundary of "U" is piecewise smooth) by Bernhard Riemann in 1851 in his PhD thesis. Lars Ahlfors wrote once, concerning the original formulation of the theorem, that it was “ultimately formulated in terms which would defy any attempt of proof, even with modern methods”. Riemann's flawed proof depended on the Dirichlet principle (which was named by Riemann himself), which was considered sound at the time. However, Karl Weierstrass found that this principle was not universally valid. Later, David Hilbert was able to prove that, to a large extent, the Dirichlet principle is valid under the hypothesis that Riemann was working with. However, in order to be valid, the Dirichlet principle needs certain hypotheses concerning the boundary of "U" which are not valid for simply connected domains in general.
The first rigorous proof of the theorem was given by William Fogg Osgood in 1900. He proved the existence of Green's function on arbitrary simply connected domains other than C itself; this established the Riemann mapping theorem.
Constantin Carathéodory gave another proof of the theorem in 1912, which was the first to rely purely on the methods of function theory rather than potential theory. His proof used Montel's concept of normal families, which became the standard method of proof in textbooks. Carathéodory continued in 1913 by resolving the additional question of whether the Riemann mapping between the domains can be extended to a homeomorphism of the boundaries (see Carathéodory's theorem).
Carathéodory's proof used Riemann surfaces and it was simplified by Paul Koebe two years later in a way that did not require them. Another proof, due to Lipót Fejér and to Frigyes Riesz, was published in 1922 and it was rather shorter than the previous ones. In this proof, like in Riemann's proof, the desired mapping was obtained as the solution of an extremal problem. The Fejér–Riesz proof was further simplified by Alexander Ostrowski and by Carathéodory.
Importance.
The following points detail the uniqueness and power of the Riemann mapping theorem:
Proof via normal families.
Simple connectivity.
Theorem. For an open domain "G" ⊂ ℂ the following conditions are equivalent:
(1) ⇒ (2) because any continuous closed curve, with base point "a" in "G", can be continuously deformed to the constant curve "a". So the line integral of "f" "dz" over the curve is 0.
(2) ⇒ (3) hecause the integral over any piecewise smooth path γ from "a" to "z" can be used to define a primitive.
(3) ⇒ (4) by integrating "f"−1"df"/"dz" along γ from "a" to "x" to give a branch of the logarithm.
(4) ⇒ (5) by taking the square root as "g" ("z") = exp "f"("z")/2 where "f" is a holomorphic choice of logarithm.
(5) ⇒ (6) because if γ is a piecewise closed curve and "f""n" are successive square roots of "z" − "w" for "w" outside "G", then the winding number of "f""n" ∘ γ about "w" is 2"n" times the winding number of γ about 0. Hence the winding number of γ about "w" must be divisible by 2"n" for all "n", so must equal 0.
(6) ⇒ (7) for otherwise the extended plane ℂ ∪ {∞} \ "G" can be written as the disjoint union of two open and closed sets "A" and "B" with ∞ in "B" and "A" bounded. Let δ &gt; 0 be the shortest euclidean distance been "A" and "B" and build a square grid on ℂ with length δ/4 with a point "a" of "A" at the centre of a square. Let "C" be the compact set of the union of all squares with distance ≤ δ/4 from "A". Then "C" ∩ "B" = ∅ and ∂"C" does not meet "A" or "B": it consists of finitely many horizontal and vertical segments in "G" forming a finite number of closed rectangular paths γ"j" in "G" . Taking "C""i" to be all the squares covering "A", the (2 π)−1 ∫∂"C" d arg("z" − "a") equals the sum of the winding numbers of "C""i" 
over "a", so gives 1. On the other hand the sum of the winding numbers of γ"j" about "a" equals 1. Hence the winding number of at least one of the γ"j" about "a" is non-zero.
Riemann mapping theorem.
Definitions. A family formula_4 of holomorphic functions on an open domain is said to be "normal" if any sequence of functions in formula_4 has a subsequence that converges to a holomorphic function uniformly on compacta. 
A family formula_4 is "compact" if whenever a sequence lies in formula_4 and converges uniformly to on compacta, then also lies in formula_4. A family formula_4 is said to be "locally bounded" if their functions are uniformly bounded on each compact disk. Differentiating the Cauchy integral formula, it follows that the derivatives of a locally bounded family are also locally bounded.
Remark. As a consequence of the Riemann mapping theorem, every simply connected domain in the plane is homeomorphic to the unit disk. If points are omitted, this follows from the theorem. For the whole plane, the homeomorphism = /(1 + ||) gives a homeomorphism of ℂ onto .
Parallel slit mappings.
Koebe's uniformization theorem for normal families also generalizes to yield uniformizers for multiply-connected domains to finite parallel slit domains, where the slits have angle to the -axis. Thus if is a domain in ℂ ∪ {∞} containing and bounded by finitely many Jordan contours, there is a unique univalent function on with = near , maximizing and having image a parallel slit domain with angle to the -axis.
The first proof that parallel slit domains were canonical domains for in the multiply connected case was given by David Hilbert in 1909. , on his book on univalent functions and conformal mappings, gave a treatment based on the work of Herbert Grötzsch and René de Possel from the early 1930s; it was the precursor of quasiconformal mappings and quadratic differentials, later developed as the technique of extremal metric due to Oswald Teichmüller. Menahem Schiffer gave a treatment based on very general variational principles, summarised in addresses he gave to the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1950 and 1958. In a theorem on "boundary variation" (to distinguish it from "interior variation"), he derived a differential equation and inequality, that relied on a measure-theoretic characterisation of straight-line segments due to Ughtred Shuttleworth Haslam-Jones from 1936. Haslam-Jones' proof was regarded as difficult and was only given a satisfactory proof in the mid-1970s by Schober and Campbell–Lamoureux.
 gave a proof of uniformization for parallel slit domains which was similar to the Riemann mapping theorem. To simplify notation, horizontal slits will be taken. Firstly, by Bieberbach's inequality, any univalent function = with in the open unit disk must satisfy || ≤ 2. As a consequence, if = is univalent in | | &gt; , then | | ≤ 2 | |: take , set
 = for in the unit disk, choosing so the denominator is nowhere-vanishing, and apply the Schwarz lemma. Next the function = is characterized by an "extremal condition" as the unique univalent function in of the form that maximises : this is an immediate consequence of Grönwall's area theorem, applied to the family of univalent functions in .
To prove now that the multiply connected domain ⊂ ℂ ∪ {∞} can be uniformized by a horizontal parallel slit conformal mapping = , take large enough that lies in the open disk || . For , univalency and the estimate | | || imply that, if lies in with | | , then | | . Since the family of univalent are locally bounded in \ {∞}, by Montel's theorem they form a normal family. Furthermore if is in the family and tends to uniformly on compacta, then is also in the family and each coefficient of the Laurent expansion at ∞ of the tends to the corresponding coefficient of . This applies in particular to the coefficient: so by compactness there is a univalent which maximizes . To check that = is the required parallel slit transformation, suppose "reductio ad absurdum" that = has a compact and connected component of its boundary which is not a horizontal slit. Then the complement of in ℂ ∪ {∞} is simply connected with ⊃ . By the Riemann mapping theorem there is a conformal mapping = such that is ℂ with a horizontal slit removed. So = and hence by the extremality of . Thus . On the other hand by the Riemann mapping theorem there is a conformal mapping = from || onto . Then = . By the strict maximality for the slit mapping in the previous paragraph , so that &gt; 0. The two inequalities for are contradictory.
The proof of the uniqueness of the conformal parallel slit transformation is given in and . Applying the inverse of the Joukowsky transform to the horizontal slit domain, it can be assumed that is a domain bounded by the unit circle and contains analytic arcs and isolated points (the images of other the inverse of the Joukowsky transform under the other parallel horizontal slits). Thus, taking a fixed in , there is a univalent mapping = = with image a horizontal slit domain. Suppose that is another uniformizer with = . The images under or of each have a fixed "y"-coordinate so are horizontal segments. On the other hand = is holomorphic in . If it is constant, then it must be identically zero since = 0. Suppose is non-constant. Then by assumption are all horizontal lines. If is not in one of these lines, Cauchy's argument principle shows that the number of solutions of = in is zero (any will eventually be encircled by contours in close to the 's). This contradicts the fact that the non-constant holomorphic function is an open mapping.
Sketch proof via Dirichlet problem.
Given "U" and a point "z"0 in "U", we want to construct a function "f" which maps "U" to the unit disk and "z"0 to 0. For this sketch, we will assume that "U" is bounded and its boundary is smooth, much like Riemann did. Write
where "g" = "u" + "iv" is some (to be determined) holomorphic function with real part "u" and imaginary part "v". It is then clear that "z"0 is the only zero of "f". We require |"f"("z")| = 1 for "z" ∈ ∂"U", so we need 
on the boundary. Since "u" is the real part of a holomorphic function, we know that "u" is necessarily a harmonic function; i.e., it satisfies Laplace's equation.
The question then becomes: does a real-valued harmonic function "u" exist that is defined on all of "U" and has the given boundary condition? The positive answer is provided by the Dirichlet principle. Once the existence of "u" has been established, the Cauchy–Riemann equations for the holomorphic function "g" allow us to find "v" (this argument depends on the assumption that "U" be simply connected). Once "u" and "v" have been constructed, one has to check that the resulting function "f" does indeed have all the required properties.
Uniformization theorem.
The Riemann mapping theorem can be generalized to the context of Riemann surfaces: If "U" is a non-empty simply-connected open subset of a Riemann surface, then "U" is biholomorphic to one of the following: the Riemann sphere, C or "D". This is known as the uniformization theorem.
Smooth Riemann mapping theorem.
In the case of a simply connected bounded domain with smooth boundary, the Riemann mapping function and all its derivatives extend by continuity to the closure of the domain. This can be proved using regularity properties of solutions of the Dirichlet boundary value problem, which follow either from the theory of Sobolev spaces for planar domains or from classical potential theory. Other methods for proving the smooth Riemann mapping theorem include the theory of kernel functions or the Beltrami equation.
Algorithms.
Computational conformal mapping is prominently featured in problems of applied analysis and mathematical physics, as well as in engineering disciplines, such as image processing.
In the early 1980s an elementary algorithm for computing conformal maps was discovered. Given points formula_22 in the plane, the algorithm computes an explicit conformal map of the unit disk onto a region bounded by a Jordan curve formula_23 with formula_24 This algorithm converges for Jordan regions in the sense of uniformly close boundaries. There are corresponding uniform estimates on the closed region and the closed disc for the mapping functions and their inverses. Improved estimates are obtained if the data points lie on a formula_25 curve or a K-quasicircle. The algorithm was discovered as an approximate method for conformal welding; however, it can also be viewed as a discretization of the Loewner differential equation.
The following is known about numerically approximating the conformal mapping between two planar domains.
Positive results:
Negative results:

