
Romano Mussolini (26 September 1927 – 3 February 2006) was an Italian jazz pianist, painter and film producer. He was the fourth and youngest son of Benito Mussolini, who was the fascist dictator of Italy from 1925 until 1943.
Biography.
A native of Villa Carpena, Forlì (Emilia-Romagna), Romano Mussolini studied music as a child, playing classical pieces with his father on the violin.
After World War II, he started playing jazz under the assumed name "Romano Full" and by the mid-1950s, he had formed a trio. Mussolini released a self-titled record (featuring Lilian Terry on vocals and trumpeter Nunzio Rotondo) through RCA Records in 1956. By the 1960s, he had formed the "Romano Mussolini All Stars", which became one of Italy's foremost jazz bands.
The All Stars recorded a well-received record "Jazz Allo Studio 7" in 1963 with "At the Santa Tecla" following a year later. Mussolini's band toured internationally with artists including Dizzy Gillespie, Duke Ellington, Helen Merrill and Chet Baker. In the 1990s, Mussolini recorded two more albums, "Perfect Alibi" and "Soft and Swing".
His playing style has been described as "...like a slightly melancholic Oscar Peterson. Occasionally inspired, he was always efficient; he made the refrains run on time."
In 1962, Mussolini married Maria Scicolone, the younger sister of actress Sophia Loren. They had two daughters, Elisabetta and her elder sister Alessandra Mussolini, who was a member of the European Parliament, and led an Italian far-right party often described as neofascist, "Alternativa Sociale". Romano Mussolini composed the party's official anthem, "The Pride of Being Italian".
With his second wife, the actress Carla Maria Puccini, he had a third daughter, Rachele, named after his mother Rachele Mussolini.
Mussolini was very reserved about his family history. It was only in 2004 that he published a book, entitled "Il Duce, mio padre" ("The Leader, my father"), followed by a similar book in 2005, collecting personal memories and accounts of private confidences and discussions with his father.
Death.
Romano Mussolini died in 2006, aged 78, in a hospital in Rome from heart problems.

