
"Rage Hard" is the fifth single by Frankie Goes to Hollywood. It was released on 25 August 1986.
Background.
Having topped the charts around the world with "Welcome to the Pleasuredome" and its accompanying singles, Frankie Goes to Hollywood took off to Amsterdam to record the follow-up album, "Liverpool". Taking on a rockier edge, "Rage Hard" was the first single culled from the disc.
Of note, "Rage Hard" was a testament to the changing musical landscape in Britain at the time. It was not only the first Frankie single to be featured on CD single, it was also the first single to not feature a cassette release - new rules limited the number of items that could count towards the official charts, following the earlier ZTT excesses.
"Rage Hard" eventually hit Number 4 in the UK singles charts and Number 1 in Germany (for two weeks), #5 in Switzerland, #7 in the Netherlands, #12 in Austria, #19 in Sweden and #32 in France.
B-sides.
The B-sides to "Rage Hard" were, for the most part, straight forward cover songs. Firstly there was a cover of David Bowie's 1972 glam-rock classic "Suffragette City", slightly renamed to "SuffRAGEtte City" to fit in with the "Rage Hard" promotion. The second cover song was "Roadhouse Blues" by The Doors which featured on the 2nd 12". A shorter version features on the CD single.
The original B-side is an odd composition entitled "(Don't Lose What's Left) Of Your Little Mind". It was released in two versions, a 4-minute mix and a 6-minute mix and featured Holly Johnson &amp; Brian (Nasher) Nash imitating Count von Count ("Ha ha ha/I am the Count") from the children's TV show "Sesame Street". This was complemented by sampled burps and belches over a backing track.
Track listing.
7": ZTT / ZTAS 22 United Kingdom.
"rage rage"
7": ZTT / ZTAX 22 United Kingdom.
 (All discographical information pertains to UK releases only)
12": ZTT / 12 ZTAS 22 United Kingdom.
"Slam Bam"
CD: ZTT / CD ZCID 22 United Kingdom.
Tracks 1 and 3.1 was rereleased in 2012 on CD Sexmix Disk 1, Tracks 14 and 15.
1993 Version.
In 1993, a version of the song appeared on the b side of The Power Of Love reissue (FGTH 3) entitled "Original DJ mix". This version is the original 7" mix from 1986, but with the first chorus removed. Instead, the first verse and second verse are jointed together. This release can also be found on a large centre hole 7" disc with the label details stamped into the naked vinyl, as opposed to a paper or printed label.

