
The Sentinels are a fictional variety of mutant-hunting robots appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. They are typically depicted as antagonists to the X-Men.
The Sentinels played a large role in the 1990s "X-Men" animated series and have been featured in several X-Men video games. The Sentinels are featured prominently in the 2014 film ' while simulated versions made brief appearances in the 2006 film ' and the 2016 film "". In 2009, the Sentinels were ranked as IGN's 38th Greatest Comic Book Villain of All Time.
Publication history.
Created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, they first appeared in "The X-Men" #14 (November 1965).
Sentinels are programmed to locate mutants and capture or kill them. Though several types of Sentinels have been introduced, the typical Sentinel is three stories tall, is capable of flight, projects energy blasts, and can detect mutants. Pursuing genocide as the means of dealing with a threat has made the Sentinels an analogy for racial hatred in Marvel stories.
Characteristics.
Sentinels are designed to hunt mutants. While many are capable of tactical thought, only a handful are self-aware.
Sentinels are technologically advanced, and have exhibited a wide variety of abilities. They are armed (primarily with energy weapons and restraining devices), capable of flight, and can detect mutants at long range. They possess vast physical strength, and their bodies are highly resistant to damage. Some are able to alter their physical forms or re-assemble and reactivate themselves after they have been destroyed.
Some Sentinel variants have the ability to learn from their experiences, developing their defenses during an engagement. Several groups of Sentinels have been created and/or led by a single massive Sentinel called Master Mold. Some Sentinels are also equipped with an inconspicuous logic loop in case they should go rogue to convince them that they are mutants as demonstrated in the Tri-Sentinel.
Types of Sentinels.
There are different types of Sentinels that appear in the comics:
Other versions.
The following are alternative versions of the Sentinels, which appear outside of regular Marvel canon.
Age of Apocalypse.
In the "Age of Apocalypse" timeline, Bolivar Trask created the Sentinels with his wife Moira. These Sentinels are equipped with several body-mounted gun turrets, and their primary directive is to protect humans rather than to hunt mutants. They are capable of cooperating with mutants in order to further this mission. Later, the Sentinels are adapted by Weapon Omega to serve a reverse purpose, and now aid in the hunting of the human race.
Days of Future Past.
In the "Days of Future Past" timeline, which takes place in an alternate future, the "Omega Sentinels" have advanced technologically and become the "de facto" rulers of the United States. The most powerful among them is Nimrod.
Hembeck.
In the joke comic "Fred Hembeck Destroys the Marvel Universe", the X-Men are killed by silent, black, man-sized "Ninja Sentinels".
Here Comes Tomorrow.
In the "Here Comes Tomorrow" future timeline, a Sentinel named Rover is Tom Skylark's companion and protector. After more than 150 years of being active, Rover has become self-aware and, possibly, capable of emotion.
House of M.
In the "House of M" storyline, Magneto is victorious in a mutant/human war. The Sentinels are adapted by Sebastian Shaw, now the director of S.H.I.E.L.D., to serve a reverse purpose, and now aid in the hunting of sapien rebels.
MC2.
In the MC2 timeline, Wild Thing encounters a Prime Sentinel that has accidentally been activated by a faulty microwave.
Ronin.
In the alternate reality of "X-Men: Ronin", the story is played out in Japan. A police unit called "Sentinel Force" designs, builds and pilots the robots. These are aesthetically similar to regular Sentinels, but each is subtly different from the others.
Star Trek.
In the comic crossover "X-Men/Star Trek: Second Contact", the X-Men work with the crew of the "Enterprise"-E to battle Kang the Conqueror. An away team composed of Captain Picard, Deanna Troi, Nightcrawler and Colossus encounter an approximation of the "Days of Future Past" timeline, in which the Sentinels have merged with the Borg.
Ultimate Marvel.
The Ultimate Marvel version of Sentinels were created by Bolivar Trask, were already in action in the "Ultimate X-Men" story arc, hunting down and killing mutants on the streets, in a program apparently openly and publicly acknowledged by the U.S. government. Later on, there were also the New Sentinels that were sixty of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s top agents in Sentinel battle armor and they were described to have enough hardware to take on a fleet of the old Sentinel models. A new breed of Sentinel robots, created by Trask under the Fenris twins' orders, was later created. After the events of the Ultimatum Wave, Nimrod Sentinels was deployed to hunt, capture or kill mutants that refused to turn themselves in. William Stryker, Jr., using Sentinel tech, later displayed an ability to summon a fleet of Sentinels after being attacked by the Shroud.
In other media.
Video games.
Sentinels have appeared as major antagonists in almost every video game to feature the X-Men:
Toys.
Several different toys of Sentinels have been made since their introduction. One is the X-Men Classics 10" Sentinel by Toybiz. A "Build-A-Figure" version of the character (based on the "Here Comes Tomorrow" storyline) was made in wave ten of the "Marvel Legends" line. In 2010, Hasbro released a large Sentinel (available in two color schemes) as part of the Marvel Universe line. Along with a large, unposeable statue, two Minimates figures have been made of the Sentinels. The first, a classic version, came with Rachel Summers in either her Phoenix or Marvel Girl guises. The second, based on "", comes with a red-haired "First Appearance" figure of Ryu.
In 2014, The Lego group released a set in the Marvel Super Heroes line titled "X-Men vs. the Sentinel", featuring the sentinel as a buildable figure, also including the Blackbird, Magneto, Wolverine, Storm, and Cyclops.
In July 2020, Hasbro announced a twenty-six inch Sentinel as part of their HasLab crowdfunding releases.

