
Samuel M. Raimi (born October 23, 1959) is an American film director, producer, screenwriter and actor primarily known for creating the cult horror "Evil Dead" series, and directing the "Spider-Man" trilogy (2002–2007). He also directed the 1990 superhero film "Darkman", the 1998 neo-noir crime-thriller "A Simple Plan", the 2000 supernatural thriller film "The Gift", the 2009 supernatural horror film "Drag Me to Hell", and the 2013 Disney fantasy film "Oz the Great and Powerful". Raimi has also produced several successful television series, including ' and its spin-off '. He founded the production company Renaissance Pictures in 1979. His movie "Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness" is scheduled for a release on March 25, 2022.
Early life.
Raimi was born in Royal Oak, Michigan, to a Conservative Jewish family, the son of merchants Celia Barbara (née Abrams) and Leonard Ronald Raimi. His ancestors were Jewish immigrants from Russia and Hungary. He is an elder brother of actor Ted Raimi, and a younger brother of screenwriter Ivan Raimi. His sister is Andrea Raimi Rubin. Another older brother, Sander Raimi, died at 15 in an accidental drowning; Sam Raimi has said that the trauma knitted the remaining family closer together and "colour[ed] everything [he's done] for the rest of [his] life."
Raimi graduated from Groves High School and later went on to attend Michigan State University, where he studied English but left after three semesters to film "The Evil Dead".
Career.
Film.
Raimi became fascinated with making films when his father brought a movie camera home one day. He began to make Super 8 movies with his friend Bruce Campbell, whom he met in 1975. In college, he teamed up with his brother's roommate Robert Tapert and Campbell to shoot "Within the Woods" (1978), a 32-minute horror film which raised $375,000, as well as his debut feature film "It's Murder!". During that time, he also shot the 7-minute short film "Clockwork" (1978), starring Scott Spiegel, who had appeared in "Within the Woods", and Cheryl Guttridge. Through family, friends, and a network of investors, Raimi was able to finance production of the highly successful horror film "The Evil Dead" (1981) which became a cult hit and effectively launched Raimi's career.
He began work on his third film "Crimewave" (1985), which he co-wrote with the then unknown Coen brothers, shortly after. Intended as a live-action comic book, the film was unsuccessful, partly due to unwanted studio intervention. Raimi then returned to the horror genre with the seminal "Evil Dead II" (which added slapstick humor to the over the top horror, showcasing his love of the Three Stooges). With his brother Ivan Raimi (and crediting himself as Celia Abrams), Sam Raimi also wrote "Easy Wheels" (1989), a parody of the Outlaw biker film genre. A long-time comic book buff, he then attempted to adapt "The Shadow" into a movie, but was unable to secure the rights, so he created his own super-hero, "Darkman" (1990). The film was his first major studio picture, and was commercially successful, spawning two sequels. Through it he was still able to secure funding for "Evil Dead III", which was retitled "Army of Darkness" and turned away almost totally from horror in favor of fantasy and comedy elements. "Army of Darkness", the final movie in the "Evil Dead" trilogy, was a box office disappointment, yet on video became a cult classic.
In the 1990s, Raimi moved into other genres, directing such films as the western "The Quick and the Dead" (starring Sharon Stone and Gene Hackman), the critically acclaimed crime thriller "A Simple Plan" (1998) (starring Bill Paxton and Billy Bob Thornton), and the romantic drama "For Love of the Game" (1999) (starring Kevin Costner).
Raimi achieved great critical and commercial success with the blockbuster "Spider-Man" (2002), which was adapted from the comic book series of the same name. The movie has grossed over US$800 million worldwide, spawning two sequels: "Spider-Man 2" and "Spider-Man 3", both directed by Raimi and each grossing approximately $800 million. 
After the completion of the third "Spider-Man" film, he planned on producing two more sequels (although Sony Pictures planned three sequels) but could not find a satisfactory script.
Raimi frequently collaborates with Joel and Ethan Coen, beginning when Joel was one of the editors of "Evil Dead". The Coens co-wrote "Crimewave" and "The Hudsucker Proxy" with Raimi in the mid-1980s (though "Hudsucker" was not produced for almost a decade). Raimi made cameo appearances in "Miller's Crossing", "The Hudsucker Proxy", and with Joel Coen in "Spies Like Us". The Coen brothers gave Raimi advice on shooting in snow for "A Simple Plan", based on their experiences with "Fargo".
He worked in front of the camera in "The Stand" as a dimwitted hitman, John Carpenter's "Body Bags" as a murdered gas station attendant, and "Indian Summer" in what is perhaps his biggest role as a bumbling assistant to Alan Arkin. The film was written by his childhood friend writer-director Mike Binder and shot at the camp that they both attended when they were younger. Raimi also produced the entire English-language "The Grudge" franchise, based on the original Japanese films.
According to "Entertainment Weekly", Raimi had expressed an interest in directing a film version of "The Hobbit", the prequel to the "Lord of the Rings" trilogy. In 2008, Guillermo del Toro was selected as the director, with Peter Jackson as the executive producer. Raimi may direct "By Any Means Necessary", the next film based on the "Jack Ryan" CIA character created by Tom Clancy for Paramount Pictures. Disney also approached him to direct "W.I.T.C.H.: The Movie", based on the popular comic.
Blizzard Entertainment announced on July 22, 2009 that Sam Raimi will be directing a "Warcraft" film. However at Comic-Con International 2012, it was revealed that he would not be the one directing the "World of Warcraft" adaptation.
On September 23, 2009, he became the producer for the British supernatural thriller "Refuge", which is directed by Corin Hardy and published by Mandate Pictures. He will produce the remake of the Danish thriller "The Substitute", which will be directed by Scott Derrickson under his new label Spooky Pictures. Raimi produced with his company Ghost House Pictures the British thriller flick "Burst 3D", which is directed by Neil Marshall.
Raimi directed "Oz the Great and Powerful", which was released on March 8, 2013 by Walt Disney Pictures. He said he would not be directing the planned sequel.
On December 11, 2006, the website SuperHero Hype reported that director Sam Raimi and Michael Uslan would co-produce a new film version of "The Shadow" for Columbia Pictures. On October 16, 2007, Raimi stated that: "I don't have any news on 'The Shadow' at this time, except that the company that I have with Josh Donen, my producing partner, we've got the rights to 'The Shadow.' I love the character very much and we're trying to work on a story that'll do justice to the character."
Raimi, along with Bruce Campbell and Rob Tapert, produced the remake of Raimi's "The Evil Dead". First-time feature filmmaker Fede Álvarez wrote and directed, and Diablo Cody was also brought in to revise/rewrite the script. Raimi confirmed plans to write "Evil Dead 4" with his brother; it was later specified that this film would be "Army of Darkness 2". Alvarez revealed that Raimi would direct the sequel to "Army of Darkness". However, in a 2014 interview, Bruce Campbell announced that "Army of Darkness 2" is not happening, saying "It's all internet b.s. There's no reality whatsoever. These random comments slip out of either my mouth, or Sam Raimi's mouth, next thing you know, we're making a sequel."
On February 26, 2016, it was confirmed that Raimi is attached to direct the upcoming film "World War 3" for Warner Bros. The film will be based on a possible future inspired by the book "The Next 100 Years" by George Friedman.
On February 16, 2017, it was reported that Raimi will be directing a thriller about the Bermuda Triangle for Skydance Media, with the script being written by Doug Miro and Carlo Bernard.
By January 29, 2018, Raimi was set to direct the first in the movie adaptations of Patrick Rothfuss's Kingkiller Chronicle series, "The Name of the Wind", with Rothfuss and "Hamilton" creator Lin-Manuel Miranda serving as executive producers.
On February 5, 2020, it was announced that Raimi was in talks with Marvel Studios to direct "Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness", and Raimi confirmed his involvement in April 2020. This marks Raimi's return to the superhero film genre after more than 13 years following "Spider-Man 3" in 2007 and his first directorial effort since 2013's "Oz the Great and Powerful."
Television.
In addition to film, Raimi has worked in television, producing such series as ' and its spin-off ', both featuring his younger brother Ted Raimi and long-time friend Bruce Campbell, "American Gothic", "Cleopatra 2525", "M.A.N.T.I.S.", ', "Young Hercules", and "Jack of All Trades". In 2008, Raimi executive produced a syndicated TV series called "Legend of the Seeker", based on Terry Goodkind's best-selling "The Sword of Truth" fantasy series. He is also the executive producer of Starz original television series ' and ', ' and "". He directed the pilot episode of "Ash vs Evil Dead" for Starz.
Personal life.
Raimi has been married since 1993 to Gillian Greene, daughter of actor Lorne Greene. They have five children, three of whom (daughter Emma Rose and sons Lorne and Henry) appeared as extras in "Drag Me to Hell", and in "Spider-Man 3" during the movie's final battle. He donated $600 to George W. Bush’s run for President in the 2004 United States election
Filmography.
Film.
 Producer only
Short films
Television.
Executive producer only

