
A snuff film is a genre or video that purports to show scenes of actual homicide. The promotion of these films depends on sensational claims that are generally impossible to prove, and there are sophisticated special effects for simulating murder.
Definition.
A snuff film, or snuff movie, is "a movie in a purported genre of movies in which a person is actually murdered or commits suicide. It may or may not be made for financial gain, but is supposedly 'circulated amongst a jaded few for the purpose of entertainment'. Some filmed records of executions, murders, and deaths in war exist, but in those cases, the death was not specifically staged for financial gain or entertainment.
History.
The first known use of the term "snuff movie" is in a 1971 book by Ed Sanders, "The Family: The Story of Charles Manson's Dune Buggy Attack Battalion". He alleges that the Manson Family was involved in making such a film in California to record their murders.
The noun "snuff" originally meant the part of a candle wick that has already burned; the verb "snuff" meant to cut this off, and by extension to extinguish or kill. The word has been used in this sense in English slang for hundreds of years. It was defined in 1874 as a "term very common among the lower orders of London, meaning to die from disease or accident".
Film studies professor Boaz Hagin argues that the concept of snuff films originated decades earlier than is commonly believed, at least as early as 1907. That year, Polish-French writer Guillaume Apollinaire published the short story "A Good Film" about newsreel photojournalists who stage and film a murder due to public fascination with crime news; in the story, the public believes the murder is real but police determine that the crime was faked. Hagin also proposes that the film "Network" (1976) contains an explicit (fictional) snuff film depiction when television news executives orchestrate the on-air murder of a news anchor to boost ratings.
According to film critic Geoffrey O'Brien, "whether or not commercially distributed 'snuff' movies actually exist, the possibility of such movies is implicit in the stock B-movie motif of the mad artist killing his models, as in "A Bucket of Blood" (1959), "Color Me Blood Red" (1965), or "Decoy for Terror" (1967) also known as "Playgirl Killer". The concept of "snuff films" being made for profit became more widely known with the commercial film "Snuff" (1976). This low-budget exploitation horror film, originally titled "Slaughter", was directed by Michael and Roberta Findlay. In an interview decades later, Roberta Findlay said the film's distributor Allan Shackleton had read about snuff films being imported from South America and retitled "Slaughter" to "Snuff", to exploit the idea; he also added a new ending that depicted an actress being murdered on a film set. The promotion of "Snuff" on its second release suggested it featured the murder of an actress: "The film that could only be made in South America... where life is CHEAP", but that was false advertising. Shackleton put out false newspaper clippings that reported a citizens group's crusading against the film and hired people to act as protesters to picket screenings.
False snuff films.
The "Guinea Pig" films.
The first two films in the Japanese "Guinea Pig" series are designed to look like snuff films; the video is grainy and unsteady, as if recorded by amateurs, and extensive practical and special effects are used to imitate such features as internal organs and graphic wounds. The sixth film in the series, "Mermaid in a Manhole", allegedly served as an inspiration for Japanese serial killer Tsutomu Miyazaki, who murdered several preschool girls in the late 1980s.
In 1991, actor Charlie Sheen became convinced that "Flower of Flesh and Blood" (1985), the second film in the series, depicted an actual homicide and contacted the FBI. The Bureau initiated an investigation but closed it after the series' producers released a "making of" film demonstrating the special effects used to simulate the murders.
"Cannibal Holocaust".
The Italian director Ruggero Deodato was charged after rumors that the depictions of the killing of the main actors in his film "Cannibal Holocaust" (1980) were real. He was able to clear himself of the charges after the actors made an appearance in court.
Other than graphic gore, the film contains several scenes of sexual violence and the genuine deaths of six animals onscreen and one off screen, issues which find "Cannibal Holocaust" in the midst of controversy to this day. It has also been claimed that "Cannibal Holocaust" is banned in over 50 countries, although this has never been verified. In 2006, "Entertainment Weekly" magazine named "Cannibal Holocaust" as the 20th most controversial film of all-time.
"Down in It".
In September 1989, during the filming of the music video for "Down in It" by Nine Inch Nails in Chicago, Trent Reznor acted in a scene which ended with the implication that Reznor's character had fallen off a building and died, an effect achieved by covering him in corn starch made to look like injuries. To film the scene, a camera was tied to a balloon with ropes attached to prevent it from flying away. Minutes after they started filming, the ropes snapped and the balloons and camera flew away; after traveling over 200 miles, the contraption landed on a farmer's field in Michigan. The farmer later handed it to the FBI, who began investigating whether the footage was a snuff film portraying a person committing suicide. The FBI identified Reznor and the investigation ended when Reznor's manager demonstrated that Reznor was alive and the footage was not related to crime.
"August Underground trilogy".
This trilogy of films, purportedly portraying amateur footage made by a serial killer and his friends, and depicting gore, sex, torture and murders, has some of its scenes distributed on the darknet as if the footage were real.

