
The "Sturgeon" class (known colloquially in naval circles as the 637 class) was a class of nuclear-powered fast attack submarines (SSN) in service with the United States Navy from the 1960s until 2004. They were the "workhorses" of the Navy's attack submarine fleet throughout much of the Cold War. The boats were phased out in the 1990s and early 21st century, as their successors, the , followed by the and -class boats, entered service.
Design.
The "Sturgeon"s were essentially lengthened and improved variants of the "Thresher/Permit" class that directly preceded them. The five-compartment arrangement of the "Permit"s was retained, including the bow compartment, operations compartment, reactor compartment, auxiliary machinery room no. 2, and the engine room. The extra length was in the operations compartment, including longer torpedo racks to accommodate additional Mark 37 torpedoes, the most advanced in service at the time of the class's design in the late 1950s. The class was designed to SUBSAFE requirements, with seawater, main ballast, and other systems redesigned for improved safety. The biggest difference was the much larger sail, which permitted a second periscope and additional intelligence-gathering masts. The fairwater planes mounted on the sail could rotate 90 degrees, allowing the submarine to surface through thin ice. Because the S5W reactor was used, the same as in the "Skipjack"s and "Thresher/Permit"s, and the displacement was increased, the "Sturgeon"s' top speed was , 2 knots slower than the "Thresher/Permit"s.
The last nine "Sturgeon"s were lengthened to provide more space for electronic equipment and habitability. The extra space also helped facilitate the use of dry deck shelters first deployed in 1982.
The class received mid-life upgrades in the 1980s, including the BQQ-5 sonar suite with a retractable towed array, Mk 117 torpedo fire control equipment, and other electronics upgrades.
Armament.
The "Sturgeon"-class boats were equipped to carry the Harpoon missile, the Tomahawk cruise missile, the UUM-44 SUBROC, the Mark 67 SLMM and Mark 60 CAPTOR mines, and the MK-48 and ADCAP torpedoes. Torpedo tubes were located amidships to accommodate the bow-mounted sonar. The bow covering the sonar sphere was made from steel or glass reinforced plastic (GRP), both varieties having been produced both booted and not booted. Booted domes are covered with a half-inch layer of rubber. The GRP domes improved the bow sonar sphere performance; though for intelligence gathering missions, the towed-array sonar was normally used as it was a much more sensitive array.
Noise reduction.
Several "Sturgeon" boats and related submarines were modifications of the original designs to test ways to reduce noise.
Variants.
Beginning with , units of this class had a longer hull, giving them more living and working space than previous submarines. received an additional hull extension containing cable tapping equipment that brought her total length to . A number of the long hull "Sturgeon"-class SSNs, including "Parche", "L. Mendel Rivers", and "Richard B. Russell" were involved in top-secret reconnaissance missions, including cable tap operations in the Barents and Okhotsk seas. "Parche" received nine Presidential Unit Citations for successful missions.
A total of seven boats were modified to carry the SEAL Dry Deck Shelter (DDS). The DDS is a submersible launch hangar with a lockout chamber attached to the ship's midships weapons shipping hatch, facilitating the use of SEAL Delivery Vehicles. DDS-equipped boats were tasked with the covert insertion of special forces.
Boats.
From "Register of Ships of the US Navy, 1775-1990".
Derivatives.
Two other Navy vessels, both considered one-ship classes, were based on the "Sturgeon" hull, but were modified for experimental reasons:

