
Space Shuttle "Atlantis" (Orbiter Vehicle Designation: OV‑104) is a Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle which belongs to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the spaceflight and space exploration agency of the United States. Manufactured by the Rockwell International company in Southern California and delivered to the Kennedy Space Center in Eastern Florida in April 1985, "Atlantis" is the fourth operational and the second-to-last Space Shuttle built. Its maiden flight was STS-51-J from 3 to 7 October 1985.
"Atlantis" embarked on its 33rd and final mission, also the final mission of a space shuttle, STS-135, on 8 July 2011. STS-134 by "Endeavour" was expected to be the final flight before STS-135 was authorized in October 2010. STS-135 took advantage of the processing for the STS-335 Launch on Need mission that would have been necessary if STS-134's crew became stranded in orbit.
"Atlantis" landed for the final time at the Kennedy Space Center on 21 July 2011.
By the end of its final mission, "Atlantis" had orbited the Earth a total of 4,848 times, traveling nearly or more than 525 times the distance from the Earth to the Moon.
"Atlantis" is named after RV "Atlantis", a two-masted sailing ship that operated as the primary research vessel for the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution from 1930 to 1966.
Missions.
Space Shuttle "Atlantis" lifted off on its maiden voyage on 3 October 1985, on mission STS-51-J, the second dedicated Department of Defense flight. It flew one other mission, STS-61-B, the second night launch in the shuttle program, before the Space Shuttle "Challenger" disaster temporarily grounded the Shuttle fleet in 1986. Among the five Space Shuttles flown into space, "Atlantis" conducted a subsequent mission in the shortest time after the previous mission (turnaround time) when it launched in November 1985 on STS-61-B, only 50 days after its previous mission, STS-51-J in October 1985. "Atlantis" was then used for ten flights between 1988 and 1992. Two of these, both flown in 1989, deployed the planetary probes "Magellan" to Venus (on STS-30) and "Galileo" to Jupiter (on STS-34). With STS-30 "Atlantis" became the first Space Shuttle to launch an interplanetary probe.
During NASA's 27th Shuttle Launch of STS-27 during an operation to release the payload, which was eventually determined to be a Lacrosse Surveillance satellite, "Atlantis" lost part of its protective heat shield during lift off, which substantially damaged the underside of the right wing, damaging more than 700 tiles, which caused the melting of aluminum plating during reentry. Before return to Earth, the Commander Robert L. Gibson thought to himself "We are going to die." due to the extensive damage to the wing. Due to the secretive nature of the "Atlantis's" payload, the crew was forced to use a more secure encrypted transmission, which had more than likely been received at a low quality. NASA engineers thought the damage was just an optical illusion of light and shadows, and as a result the crew was infuriated. During reentry, Robert L. Gibson, the commander for the mission, returned the Shuttle safely. Upon inspection the Shuttle's bottom right wing was seen to be severely damaged in critical areas. Ultimately, the same fate would eventually be the result that destroyed the Space Shuttle "Columbia" in 2003, due to tile failures, which resulted in the "Columbia" being ripped apart on reentry. Had "Atlantis" been destroyed during the mission in 1988, more than likely the second destruction of an Orbiter would have set NASA back at least two years, forced a redesign of the fuel tanks foam coverings and the fragile heat shield plating, or it would have forced NASA to close down the Shuttle Program 22 years before it actually ended.
During STS-37 in 1991, "Atlantis" deployed the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. Beginning in 1995 with STS-71, "Atlantis" made seven straight flights to the former Russian space station Mir as part of the Shuttle-Mir Program. STS-71 marked a number of firsts in human spaceflight: 100th U.S. crewed space flight; first U.S. Shuttle-Russian Space Station Mir docking and joint on-orbit operations; and first on-orbit change-out of shuttle crew. When linked, "Atlantis" and "Mir" together formed the largest spacecraft in orbit at the time.
"Atlantis" delivered several vital components for the construction of the International Space Station (ISS). During the February 2001 mission STS-98 to the ISS, "Atlantis" delivered the Destiny Module, the primary operating facility for U.S. research payloads aboard the ISS. The five-hour 25-minute third spacewalk performed by astronauts Robert Curbeam and Thomas Jones during STS-98 marked NASA's 100th extra vehicular activity in space. The Quest Joint Airlock, was flown and installed to the ISS by "Atlantis" during the mission STS-104 in July 2001. The successful installation of the airlock gave on-board space station crews the ability to stage repair and maintenance spacewalks outside the ISS using U.S. EMU or Russian Orlan space suits. The first mission flown by "Atlantis" after the Space Shuttle "Columbia" disaster was STS-115, conducted during September 2006. The mission carried the P3/P4 truss segments and solar arrays to the ISS. On ISS assembly flight STS-122 in February 2008, "Atlantis" delivered the Columbus laboratory to the ISS. Columbus laboratory is the largest single contribution to the ISS made by the European Space Agency (ESA).
In May 2009 "Atlantis" flew a seven-member crew to the Hubble Space Telescope for its Servicing Mission 4, STS-125. The mission was a success, with the crew completing five spacewalks totalling 37 hours to install new cameras, batteries, a gyroscope and other components to the telescope. This was the final mission not to rendezvous with the ISS.
The longest mission flown using "Atlantis" was STS-117 which lasted almost 14 days in June 2007. During STS-117, Atlantis' crew added a new starboard truss segment and solar array pair (the S3/S4 truss), folded the P6 array in preparation for its relocation and performed four spacewalks. "Atlantis" was not equipped to take advantage of the Station-to-Shuttle Power Transfer System so missions could not be extended by making use of power provided by ISS.
During the STS-129 post-flight interview on 16 November 2009, shuttle launch director Mike Leinbach said that "Atlantis" officially beat Space Shuttle "Discovery" for the record low amount of Interim Problem Reports, with a total of just 54 listed since returning from STS-125. He continued to add "It is due to the team and the hardware processing. They just did a great job. The record will probably never be broken again in the history of the Space Shuttle Program, so congratulations to them".
During the STS-132 post-launch interview on 14 May 2010, Shuttle launch director Mike Leinbach said that "Atlantis" beat its own previous record low amount of Interim Problem Reports, with a total of 46 listed between STS-129 and STS-132.
Orbiter Maintenance Down Periods.
"Atlantis" went through two overhauls of scheduled Orbiter Maintenance Down Periods (OMDPs) during its operational history.
"Atlantis" after suffering severe damage to the right wing during STS-27 take-off, was forced to undergo repair to the aluminum structure, and replacement to 700 of the tiles in 1988. The Shuttle was relaunched in 1989.
"Atlantis" arrived at Palmdale, California in October 1992 for OMDP-1. During that visit 165 modifications were made over the next 20 months. These included the installation of a drag chute, new plumbing lines to configure the orbiter for extended duration, improved nose wheel steering, more than 800 new heat tiles and blankets, new insulation for main landing gear, and structural modifications to the airframe.
On 5 November 1997, "Atlantis" again arrived at Palmdale for OMDP-2 which was completed on 24 September 1998. The 130 modifications carried out during OMDP-2 included glass cockpit displays, replacement of TACAN navigation with GPS and ISS airlock and docking installation. Several weight reduction modifications were performed on the orbiter including replacement of Advanced Flexible Reusable Surface Insulation (AFRSI) insulation blankets on upper surfaces with FRSI. Lightweight crew seats were installed and the Extended Duration Orbiter (EDO) package installed on OMDP-1 was removed to lighten "Atlantis" to better serve its prime mission of servicing the ISS.
During the stand down period post "Columbia" accident, "Atlantis" went through over 75 modifications to the orbiter ranging from very minor bolt change-outs to window change-outs and different fluid systems.
"Atlantis" was known among the Shuttle workforce as being more prone than the others in the fleet to problems that needed to be addressed while readying the vehicle for launch, leading to some nicknaming it "Britney".
Decommissioning.
NASA initially planned to withdraw "Atlantis" from service in 2008, as the orbiter would have been due to undergo its third scheduled OMDP; the timescale of the final retirement of the shuttle fleet was such that having the orbiter undergo this work was deemed uneconomical. It was planned that "Atlantis" would be kept in near-flight condition to be used as a spares source for "Discovery" and "Endeavour". However, with the significant planned flight schedule up to 2010, the decision was taken to extend the time between OMDPs, allowing "Atlantis" to be retained for operations. "Atlantis" was subsequently swapped for one flight of each "Discovery" and "Endeavour" in the flight manifest. "Atlantis" had completed what was meant to be its last flight, STS-132, prior to the end of the shuttle program, but the extension of the Shuttle program into 2011 led to "Atlantis" being selected for STS-135, the final Space Shuttle mission in July 2011.
"Atlantis" is currently displayed at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex. NASA Administrator Charles Bolden announced the decision at an employee event held on 12 April 2011 to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the first shuttle flight: "First, here at the Kennedy Space Center where every shuttle mission and so many other historic human space flights have originated, we'll showcase my old friend, "Atlantis"."
The Visitor Complex displays "Atlantis" with payload bay doors opened mounted at an angle to give the appearance of being in orbit around the Earth. The 43.21-degree mount angle pays tribute to the countdown that preceded every shuttle launch at KSC. A multi-story digital projection of Earth rotates behind the orbiter in a indoor facility. Ground breaking of the facility occurred in 2012.
The exhibit opened on 29 June 2013.
Crews.
A total of 156 individuals flew with Space Shuttle "Atlantis" over the course of its 33 missions. Because the shuttle sometimes flew crew members arriving and departing Mir and the ISS, not all of them launched and landed on "Atlantis".
Astronaut Clayton Anderson, ESA astronaut Leopold Eyharts and Russian cosmonauts Nikolai Budarin and Anatoly Solovyev only launched on "Atlantis". Similarly, astronauts Daniel Tani and Sunita Williams, as well as cosmonauts Vladimir Dezhurov and Gennady Strekalov only landed with "Atlantis". Only 146 men and women both launched and landed aboard "Atlantis".
Some of those people flew with "Atlantis" more than once. Taking them into account, 203 total seats were filled over "Atlantis" 33 missions. Astronaut Jerry Ross holds the record for the most flights aboard "Atlantis" at five.
Astronaut Rodolfo Neri Vela who flew aboard "Atlantis" on STS-61-B mission in 1985 became the first and so far only Mexican to have traveled to space. ESA astronaut Dirk Frimout who flew on STS-45 as a payload specialist was the first Belgian in space. STS-46 mission specialist Claude Nicollier was the first astronaut from Switzerland. On the same flight, astronaut Franco Malerba became the first citizen of Italy to travel to space.
Astronaut Michael Massimino who flew on STS-125 mission became the first person to use Twitter in space in May 2009.
Having flown aboard "Atlantis" as part of the STS-132 crew in May 2010 and "Discovery" as part of the STS-133 crew in February/March 2011, Stephen Bowen became the first NASA astronaut to be launched on consecutive missions.
Problems.
Composite overwrapped pressure vessels.
NASA announced in 2007 that 24 helium and nitrogen gas tanks in "Atlantis" were older than their designed lifetime. These composite overwrapped pressure vessels (COPV) were designed for a 10-year life and later cleared for an additional 10 years; they exceeded this life in 2005. NASA said it could not guarantee any longer that the vessels on "Atlantis" would not burst or explode under full pressure. Failure of these tanks could have damaged parts of the orbiter and even wound or kill ground personnel. An in-flight failure of a pressure vessel could have even resulted in the loss of the orbiter and its crew. NASA analyses originally assumed that the vessels would leak before they burst, but new tests showed that they could in fact burst before leaking.
Because the original vendor was no longer in business, and a new manufacturer could not be qualified before 2010, when the shuttles were scheduled to be retired, NASA decided to continue operations with the existing tanks. Therefore, to reduce the risk of failure and the cumulative effects of load, the vessels were maintained at 80 percent of the operating pressure as late in the launch countdown as possible, and the launch pad was cleared of all but essential personnel when pressure was increased to 100 percent. The new launch procedure was employed during some of the remaining launches of "Atlantis", but was resolved when the two COPVs deemed to have the highest risk of failure were replaced.
Window damage.
After the STS-125 mission, a work light knob was discovered jammed in the space between one of "Atlantis"s front interior windows and the Orbiter dashboard structure. The knob was believed to have entered the space during flight, when the pressurized Orbiter was expanded to its maximum size. Then, once back on Earth, the Orbiter contracted, jamming the knob in place. Leaving "as-is" was considered unsafe for flight, and some options for removal (including window replacement) would have included a 6-month delay of "Atlantis"s next mission (planned to be STS-129). Had the removal of the knob been unsuccessful, the worst-case scenario was that "Atlantis" could have been retired from the fleet, leaving "Discovery" and "Endeavour" to complete the manifest alone. On 29 June 2009, "Atlantis" was pressurized to (3 psi above ambient), which forced the Orbiter to expand slightly. The knob was then frozen with dry ice, and successfully removed. Small areas of damage to the window were discovered where the edges of the knob had been embedded into the pane. Subsequent investigation of the window damage discovered a maximum defect depth of approximately , less than the reportable depth threshold of and not serious enough to warrant the pane's replacement.

