
The Toledo Mud Hens are a Minor League Baseball team of the Triple-A East and the Triple-A affiliate of the Detroit Tigers. They are located in Toledo, Ohio, and play their home games at Fifth Third Field. From their founding in 1965 through 2020, the Mud Hens were members of the International League. They joined the Triple-A East in 2021.
Background.
Professional baseball had been played off and on in Toledo since 1883, but the Mud Hens era began in 1896 with the "Swamp Angels", who played in the Interstate League. They played in Bay View Park, which was outside the Toledo city limits and therefore not covered by the city's blue laws. The park was located near marshland inhabited by American coots, also known as "mud hens." For this reason, the local press soon dubbed the team the "Mud Hens"—a nickname that has stuck to Toledo baseball teams for all but a few years since. After only one year, though, the team moved to Armory Park.
A "Mud Hens" team played in the American Association from its founding in 1903 until the team moved to Wichita, KS to become the Wichita Braves in 1955.
History.
An International League franchise moved to Toledo from Richmond, Virginia in 1965 adopting the "Mud Hens" name to become the current incarnation of the "Toledo Mud Hens." However they were based in Maumee, Ohio at the converted Fort Miami Fairgrounds. The local ownership group led by Ned Skeldon signed with the New York Yankees to be its top minor league team. In 1967, the Detroit Tigers replaced the Yankees as its major league affiliate. That year, the team was third in the league but claimed the Governor's Cup via the four team playoff. The next year the team won a record 83 games and the league pennant, while failing to win the cup again. The team was affiliated with Detroit until 1974. In 1974 and 1975, the Phillies affiliated with the Mud Hens, followed by two years affiliated with Cleveland Indians. All four seasons were losing seasons.pg. 77
The Minnesota Twins took over as the team's major league affiliate and brought in Gene Cook as general manager, who was good at promoting the team, particularly as a family event. Cook also got Jamie Farr to incorporate the Mud Hens in Farr's "M*A*S*H" character's background.pg. 77
In conjunction with Major League Baseball's restructuring of Minor League Baseball in 2021, the Mud Hens were organized into the 20-team Triple-A East.
Season-by-season records.
The records of the last five Toledo Mud Hens seasons are listed below.

