
The Doors is the debut album by the American rock band the Doors. Recorded in 1966 at Sunset Sound Recorders, Hollywood, California, it was produced by Paul A. Rothchild and released on January 4, 1967. The album features a wide range of musical influences, including jazz, classical, blues, pop, R&amp;B and rock music. Since it's release, the record has been often declared as one of the greatest debut-albums of all time, by numerous publications. It features the long version of the breakthrough single "Light My Fire" and the lengthy song "The End" with its Oedipal spoken word section.
"The Doors" and "Light My Fire" have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. In 2015 the Library of Congress selected "The Doors" for inclusion in the National Recording Registry based on its cultural, artistic or historical significance.
Background.
The Doors' final lineup was formed in mid-1965 after keyboardist Ray Manzarek's two brothers Rick and Jim Manczarek left Rick &amp; the Ravens, whose members included besides Manzarek, jazz-influenced drummer John Densmore and then-novice vocalist Jim Morrison. The group was intergrated when guitarist Robby Krieger agreed to join. Though he had previous experience playing folk and flamenco, Krieger had only been playing the electric guitar for a few months when he was invited to become a member of the band, soon renamed the Doors. They were initially signed to Columbia Records under a six-month contract, but they asked for an early release after the record company failed to secure a producer for the album and placed them on a drop list.
After being released from the label, the Doors played residencies in mid-1966 at two historic Sunset Strip club venues, the London Fog and Whisky a Go Go. They were spotted at the Whisky a Go Go by Elektra Records president Jac Holzman, who was present at the suggestion of Love singer Arthur Lee. After he saw two sets, Holzman called producer Paul A. Rothchild to see the group. On August 10, after seeing several interpretations of the band, Holzman and Rothchild signed them to Elektra Records.
The Doors continued performing at the Whisky a Go Go until on August 21, when they were fired due to their performance of "The End" on which lead singer Jim Morrison added an profanity-laden version of the Greek myth of Oedipus. Morrison had missed the first of two sets that night because he was at the Tropicana Hotel tripping on LSD.
Recording.
"The Doors" was recorded by producer Paul A. Rothchild and audio engineer Bruce Botnick at Sunset Sound Studios in Hollywood, California in less than one month in August and September 1966. A four-track tape machine was used for recording, using mostly three tracks: bass and drums on one, guitar and organ on another, and Morrison's vocals on the third. The fourth track was used for overdubbing (mostly Morrison's harmony vocals and bass). The album features a limited use of variety instruments, including only keyboards, electric guitar, bass (on some tracks) and drums. Rothchild had forbade Robby Krieger to use guitar pedals on the record, on the occasion to do something which will differ from other recordings.
Session musician Larry Knechtel and Krieger, overdubbed bass on several tracks in order to give some "punch" to the sound of Manzarek's keyboard bass. For "The End", two takes were edited together to achieve the final recording. According to Manzarek, "Light My Fire" also took two takes to finish.
Composition.
"The Doors" features many of the group's most famous compositions, including "Light My Fire", "Break On Through (To the Other Side)", and "The End". In 1969, Morrison stated:
Interviewed by Lizze James, he pointed out the meaning of the verse "My only friend, the end":
"Break On Through (To the Other Side)" was released as the group's first single but it was relatively unsuccessful, peaking at No. 104 in "Cash Box" and No. 126 in "Billboard". Elektra Records edited the line "she gets high", knowing a drug reference would discourage airplay (most remasters from 1999 onward have the original portions of both "Break On Through" and "The End" restored). The song is in 4/4 time and quite fast-paced, starting with Densmore's bossa nova drum groove in which a clave pattern is played as a rim click underneath a driving ride cymbal pattern. Densmore appreciated the new bossa nova craze coming from Brazil, so he decided to use it in the song. Robby Krieger has stated that he took the idea for the guitar riff from Paul Butterfield's version of the song "Shake Your Moneymaker" (originally by blues guitarist Elmore James). Later, a disjointed quirky organ solo is played quite similar to the introduction of Ray Charles' "What'd I Say".
The Doors breakout hit "Light My Fire" was composed by Krieger. Although the album version was just over seven minutes long, it was widely requested for radio play, so a single version was edited to under three minutes with nearly all the instrumental break removed for airplay on AM radio. Krieger has claimed that it was Morrison who encouraged the others to write songs when they realized they did not have enough original material.
"The Doors" also contains two cover songs: "Alabama Song" and "Back Door Man". "Alabama Song" was written and composed by Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill in 1927, for their opera "Aufstieg und Fall der Stadt Mahagonny" ("Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny"). The melody is changed and the verse beginning "Show me the way to the next little dollar" is omitted. On the album version, Morrison altered the second verse from "Show us the way to the next pretty boy" to "Show me the way to the next little girl", but on the 1967 "Live at the Matrix" recording, he sings the original "next pretty boy". The Chicago blues "Back Door Man" was written by Willie Dixon and originally recorded by Howlin' Wolf.
Releases.
"The Doors" was released on January 4, 1967, by Elektra Records. Jac Holzman initially decided to release the record in November 1966, but following a negotiation with the other members of the band, he postponed the release of the album to January 4, 1967. Holzman also suggested an association with "Billboard" magazine to advertise the album, a novel concept which was made popular later on. The Doors were the first rock band to use this advertise medium.
"The Doors" made a steady climb up the "Billboard" 200, ultimately becoming a huge success in the US once the edited single version of "Light My Fire" scaled the charts to become No. 1, with the album peaking at No. 2 on the chart in September 1967 (stuck behind the Beatles' "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band") and going on to achieve multi-platinum status. In Europe the band would have to wait slightly longer for similar recognition, with "Light My Fire" originally stalling at No. 49 in the UK singles chart and the album failing to chart at all; however, in 1991, buoyed by the high-profile Oliver Stone film "The Doors", a reissue of "Light My Fire" reached No. 7 in the singles chart, and the album reached No. 43.
The mono LP was withdrawn not long after its original release and remained unavailable until 2010, when it was reissued as a limited edition 180 gram audiophile LP by Rhino Records. The 40th anniversary mix of the debut album presents a stereo version of "Light My Fire" in speed-corrected form for the first time. Previously, only the original 45 RPM singles ("Light My Fire" and "Break On Through") were produced at the correct speed.
Reissues.
"The Doors" has been released in 2006 in multichannel DVD-Audio, and on September 14, 2011, on hybrid stereo-multichannel Super Audio CD by Warner Japan in their Warner Premium Sound series. The album was once again remastered and reissued on March 31, 2017, to celebrate the album's 50th anniversary. This 50th Anniversary Deluxe Edition contains the original stereo mix (including "Light My Fire" in its original incorrect speed) and the original mono mix, both available for the first time in remastered form.
Reception and legacy.
In a contemporary review for "Crawdaddy!" magazine, Paul Williams hailed "The Doors" as "an album of magnitude" while likening the band to Brian Wilson and the Rolling Stones as creators of "modern music", with which "contemporary 'jazz' and 'classical' composers must try to measure up". Williams added: "The birth of the group is in this album, and it's as good as anything in rock. The awesome fact about the Doors is that they will improve."
Robert Christgau was less enthusiastic in his column for "Esquire", recommending the album but with reservations; he approved of Manzarek's organ playing and Morrison's "flexible though sometimes faint" singing while highlighting the presence of a "great hard rock original" in "Break on Through" and clever songs such as "Twentieth Century Fox", but was critical of more "esoteric" material such as the "long, obscure dirge" "The End". He also found Morrison's lyrics often self-indulgent, particularly lines like "our love becomes a funeral pyre", which he said spoiled "Light My Fire", and "the nebulousness that passes for depth among so many lovers of rock poetry" on "The End".
"The Doors" has since been frequently ranked by critics as one of the greatest albums of all time; according to Acclaimed Music, it is the 27th most ranked record on all-time lists. In 2003, Parke Puterbaugh of "Rolling Stone" called the record "the L.A. foursome's most successful marriage of rock poetics with classically tempered hard rocka stoned, immaculate classic." Sean Egan of BBC Music opines, "The eponymous debut of The Doors took popular music into areas previously thought impossible: the incitement to expand one's consciousness of opener 'Break on Through' was just the beginning of its incendiary agenda." Paul McCartney of the Beatles, has claimed that following the album's release, he wanted his band to capitalize the Doors musical style as one of the "alter egos" of the group, for their upcoming album "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band".
In 2000, the album was voted number 46 in Colin Larkin's "All Time Top 1000 Albums". "The Doors" is ranked No. 42 on "Rolling Stone"'s list of "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time". When the list was revised in 2020, the album was included at No. 86. "Q" magazine ranked the album at No. 75 on its list of the "100 Greatest Albums Ever" and No. 226 in "NME" magazine's "500 Greatest Albums of All Time". In 2007, "Rolling Stone" included it on their list of The 40 Essential Albums of 1967. More recently, "Ultimate Classic Rock" cited it as the fourth-top psychedelic rock album of all time.
Track listing.
Original album.
All tracks are written by the Doors (Jim Morrison, Ray Manzarek, Robby Krieger and John Densmore), except where noted. Details are taken from the 1967 U.S. Elektra release; other releases may show different information.
Personnel.
The Doors
Additional musicians
Production
Charts.
Album
Singles

