
Tai chi (), short for T'ai chi ch'üan or Tàijí quán (), sometimes colloquially known as "Shadowboxing," is an internal Chinese martial art practiced for defense training, health benefits, and meditation. The term "taiji" is a Chinese cosmological concept for the flux of yin and yang, and 'quan' means fist. Etymologically, Taijiquan is a fist system based on the dynamic relationship between polarities (Yin and Yang). Developed as a martial art, it is practiced for other reasons: competitive wrestling in the format of pushing hands ("tui shou"), demonstration competitions, and greater longevity. As a result, a multitude of traditional and modern training forms exist corresponding to those aims with differing emphasis. Some training forms of tai chi are practiced with extremely slow movements.
Today, tai chi has enthusiastic practitioners worldwide. Most modern styles of tai chi trace their development to one or more of the five traditional schools: Chen, Yang, Wu (Hao), Wu, and Sun. All trace their historical origins to Chen Village. Taijiquan was added to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists in 2020 for China.
Historical background.
Tai Chi was known as "大恒" during the Warring States period. The silk version of I Ching recorded this original name. Due to the name taboo of Emperor Wen of Western Han Empire , "大恒" changed to "太極." It is from sundial shadow length changes representing the Traditional Chinese Medicine with four elements theory instead of the Confucianism politician-based counterfeit five elements theory.
In the beginning, the color white was considered as Yin and black was considered as Yang. It is different from the Confucianism which considers white as Yang and black as Yin instead.
Overview.
The concept of the "taiji", in contrast with "wuji" ("without ultimate"), appears in both Taoist and Confucian Chinese philosophy, where it represents the fusion or mother of yin and yang into a single ultimate, represented by the "taijitu" symbol . Tai chi theory and practice evolved in agreement with many Chinese philosophical principles, including those of Taoism and Confucianism.
Tai chi training involves five elements, "taolu" (solo hand and weapons routines/forms), "neigong" and "qigong" (breathing, movement and awareness exercises and meditation), "tuishou" (response drills) and "sanshou" (self defense techniques). While tai chi is typified by some for its slow movements, many styles (including the three most popular: Yang, Wu and Chen) have secondary forms with faster pace. Some traditional schools teach partner exercises known as "tuishou" ("pushing hands"), and martial applications of the postures of different forms (taolu).
In China, tai chi is categorized under the "Wudang" grouping of Chinese martial arts—that is, the arts applied with internal power. Although the term Wudang suggests these arts originated in the Wudang Mountains, it is simply used to distinguish the skills, theories and applications of "neijia" (internal arts) from those of the Shaolin grouping, or "waijia" (hard or external) styles.
Since the earliest widespread promotion of the health benefits of tai chi by Yang Shaohou, Yang Chengfu, Wu Chien-ch‘üan and Sun Lutang in the early 20th century, it has developed a worldwide following of people, often with little or no interest in martial training, for its benefit to personal health. Medical studies of t‘ai-chi support its effectiveness as an alternative exercise and a form of martial arts therapy.
It is purported that focusing the mind solely on the movements of the form helps to bring about a state of mental calm and clarity. Besides general health benefits and stress management attributed to tai chi training, aspects of traditional Chinese medicine are taught to advanced students in some traditional schools.
Some other forms of martial arts require students to wear a uniform during practice. In general, tai chi schools do not require a uniform, but both traditional and modern teachers often advocate loose, comfortable clothing and flat-soled shoes.
The physical techniques of tai chi are described in the "T‘ai-chi classics", a set of writings by traditional masters, as being characterized by the use of leverage through the joints based on coordination and relaxation, rather than muscular tension, in order to neutralize, yield or initiate attacks. The slow, repetitive work involved in the process of learning how that leverage is generated gently and measurably increases, as well as opens, the internal circulation (breath, body heat, blood, lymph, peristalsis).
The study of tai chi primarily involves three aspects:
Name.
"Tàijíquán" and "T‘ai-chi ch‘üan" are two different transcriptions of three Chinese characters that are the written Chinese name for the artform:
Despite the one Chinese spelling, , there are two different spellings in the English usage, one derived from the Wade–Giles and the other from the Pinyin transcription. Most Westerners often shorten this name to "t‘ai chi" (often omitting the aspirate sign—thus becoming "tai chi"). This shortened name is the same as that of the "t‘ai-chi" philosophy, sometimes causing confusion of the two. However, the Pinyin romanization is "taiji". The "chi" in the name of the martial art should not be mistaken for "ch‘i", ("qi" the "life force") especially as "ch‘i" is involved in the practice of "t‘ai-chi ch‘üan." Although the word is traditionally written "chi" in English, the closest pronunciation, using English sounds, to that of standard Mandarin would be "jee", with "j" pronounced as in "jump" and "ee" pronounced as in "bee". Other words exist with Mandarin pronunciations in which the "ch" is pronounced as in "chump". Thus, it's important, to avoid confusion, to use the "j" sound. This potential for confusion suggests preferring the pinyin spelling, "taiji". Most Chinese, including many professional practitioners, masters, and martial arts bodies (such as the International Wushu Federation (IWUF)), use the Pinyin version.
Historical origin.
From a modern historical perspective, when tracing tai chi's formative influences to Taoist and Buddhist monasteries, there seems little more to go on than legendary tales. Nevertheless, some schools claim that tai chi has a practical connection to and dependence upon the theories of Song dynasty Neo-Confucianism (a conscious synthesis of Taoist, Buddhist, and Confucian traditions, especially the teachings of Mencius). These schools believe that tai chi's theories and practice were formulated by the Taoist monk Zhang Sanfeng in the 12th century, at about the same time that the principles of the Neo-Confucian school were making themselves felt in Chinese intellectual life. 
However, modern research casts serious doubts on the validity of those claims, pointing out that a 17th-century piece called "Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan" (1669), composed by Huang Zongxi (1610–1695), is the earliest reference indicating any connection between Zhang Sanfeng and martial arts whatsoever, and must not be taken literally but must be understood as a political metaphor instead. Claims of connections between tai chi and Zhang Sanfeng appeared no earlier than the 19th century.
History records that Yang Luchan trained with the Chen family for 18 years before he started to teach the art in Beijing, which strongly suggests that his art was based on, or heavily influenced by, the Chen family art. The Chen family are able to trace the development of their art back to Chen Wangting in the 17th century. Martial arts historian Xu Zhen believed that the tai chi of Chen Village had been influenced by the "Taizu changquan" style practiced at the nearby Shaolin Monastery, while Tang Hao thought it was derived from a treatise by the Ming dynasty general Qi Jiguang, "Jixiao Xinshu" ("New Treatise on Military Efficiency"), which discussed several martial arts styles including "Taizu changquan".
What is now known as tai chi appears to have received this appellation from only around the mid of the 19th century. A scholar in the Imperial Court by the name of Ong Tong He witnessed a demonstration by Yang Luchan at a time before Yang had established his reputation as a teacher. Afterwards Ong wrote: "Hands holding Tai chi shakes the whole world, a chest containing ultimate skill defeats a gathering of heroes." Before this time the art may have had a number of different names, and appears to have been generically described by outsiders as "zhan quan" (, "touch boxing"), "Mian Quan" ("soft boxing") or "shisan shi" (, "the thirteen techniques").
History and styles.
There are five major styles of tai chi, each named after the Chinese family from which it originated:
The order of verifiable age is as listed above. The order of popularity (in terms of number of practitioners) is Yang, Wu, Chen, Sun and Wu/Hao. The major family styles share much underlying theory, but differ in their approaches to training.
There are now dozens of new styles, hybrid styles, and offshoots of the main styles, but the five family schools are the groups recognized by the international community as being the orthodox styles. Other important styles are Zhaobao tàijíquán, a close cousin of Chen style, which has been newly recognized by Western practitioners as a distinct style; the Fu style, created by Fu Chen Sung, which evolved from Chen, Sun and Yang styles, and also incorporates movements from Baguazhang (Pa Kua Chang); and the Cheng Man-ch'ing style which is a simplification of the traditional Yang style.
Most existing styles can be traced back to the Chen style, which had been passed down as a family secret for generations. 
The designation "internal" or "neijia" martial arts is also used to broadly distinguish what are known as the "external" or "waijia" styles based on the "Shaolinquan" styles, although that distinction is sometimes disputed by modern schools. In this broad sense, "all" styles of t'ai chi, as well as related arts such as Baguazhang and Xingyiquan, are, therefore, considered to be "soft" or "internal" martial arts.
Tai chi in the United States of America.
Choy Hok Pang, a disciple of Yang Chengfu, was the first known proponent of tai chi to openly teach in the United States in 1939. Subsequently, his son and student Choy Kam Man emigrated to San Francisco from Hong Kong in 1949 to teach t‘ai-chi ch‘üan in San Francisco's Chinatown. Choy Kam Man taught until he died in 1994.
Sophia Delza, a professional dancer and student of Ma Yueliang, performed the first known public demonstration of tai chi in the United States at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City in 1954. She also wrote the first English language book on t‘ai-chi, "T‘ai-chi ch‘üan: Body and Mind in Harmony", in 1961. She taught regular classes at Carnegie Hall, the Actors Studio, and the United Nations.
Another early practitioner of tai chi to openly teach in the United States was Zheng Manqing/Cheng Man-ch'ing, who opened his school Shr Jung t‘ai-chi after he moved to New York from Taiwan in year 1964. Unlike the older generation of practitioners, Zheng was cultured and educated in American ways, and thus he was able to transcribe Yang's dictation into a written manuscript that became the de facto manual for Yang style. Zheng felt Yang's traditional 108-movement long form was unnecessarily long and repetitive, which makes it difficult to learn and make progress. He thus created a shortened 37-movement version and taught that in his schools. Zheng's form became very popular and was the dominant form in the eastern United States until other teachers started to emigrate to the United States in larger numbers in the 90's. He taught until his death in 1975. 
Tai chi in the United Kingdom.
Norwegian Pytt Geddes was the first European to teach tai chi in Britain, holding classes at The Place in London in the early 1960s. She had first encountered tai chi in Shanghai in 1948, and studied it with Choy Hok Pang and his son Choy Kam Man (who both also taught in the United States) while living in Hong Kong in the late 1950s.
T‘ai-chi ch‘üan lineage tree.
Modern forms.
The Cheng Man-ch‘ing (Zheng Manqing) and Chinese Sports Commission short forms are derived from Yang family forms, but neither is recognized as Yang family tai chi by standard-bearing Yang family teachers. The Chen, Yang, and Wu families are now promoting their own shortened demonstration forms for competitive purposes.
Tai chi today.
In the last twenty years or so, tai chi classes that purely emphasise health have become popular in hospitals, clinics, as well as community and senior centres. This has occurred as the baby boomers generation has aged and the art's reputation as a low-stress training method for seniors has become better known.
As a result of this popularity, there has been some divergence between those that say they practice tai chi primarily for self-defence, those that practice it for its aesthetic appeal (see "wushu" below), and those that are more interested in its benefits to physical and mental health. The "wushu" aspect is primarily for show; the forms taught for those purposes are designed to earn points in competition and are mostly unconcerned with either health maintenance or martial ability. More traditional stylists believe the two aspects of health and martial arts are equally necessary: the "yin and yang" of tai chi. The tai chi "family" schools, therefore, still present their teachings in a martial art context, whatever the intention of their students in studying the art.
Tai chi as sport.
In order to standardize t‘ai-chi ch‘üan for "wushu" tournament judging, and because many tai chi teachers have either moved out of China or had been forced to stop teaching after the Chinese Civil War in 1949, the government sponsored the Chinese Sports Committee, who brought together four of their "wushu" teachers to truncate the Yang family hand form to 24 postures in 1956. They wanted to retain the look of tai chi, but create a routine that would be less difficult to teach and much less difficult to learn than longer (in general, 88 to 108 posture), classical, solo hand forms. In 1976, they developed a slightly longer form also for the purposes of demonstration that still would not involve the complete memory, balance, and coordination requirements of the traditional forms. This became the "Combined 48 Forms" that were created by three "wushu" coaches, headed by Men Hui Feng. The combined forms were created based on simplifying and combining some features of the classical forms from four of the original styles: Chen, Yang, Wu, and Sun. As tai chi again became popular on the mainland, more competitive forms were developed to be completed within a six-minute time limit. In the late 1980s, the Chinese Sports Committee standardized many different competition forms. They developed sets to represent the four major styles as well as combined forms. These five sets of forms were created by different teams, and later approved by a committee of "wushu" coaches in China. All sets of forms thus created were named after their style: the "Chen-style national competition form" is the "56 Forms". The combined forms are "The 42-Form" or simply the "Competition Form".
Another modern form is the "97 movements combined t‘ai-chi ch‘üan form", created in the 1950s; it contains characteristics of the Yang, Wu, Sun, Chen, and Fu styles blended into a combined form. The "wushu" coach Bow Sim Mark is a notable exponent of the "67 combined form".
These modern versions of tai chi have since become an integral part of international "wushu" tournament competition, and have been featured in popular movies, starring or choreographed by well-known "wushu" competitors, such as Jet Li and Donnie Yen.
In the 11th Asian Games of 1990, "wushu" was included as an item for competition for the first time with the "42-Form" being chosen to represent t‘ai-chi ch‘üan. The International Wushu Federation (IWUF) applied for "wushu" to be part of the Olympic games, but will not count medals.
Practitioners also test their practical martial skills against students from other schools and martial arts styles in "tuishou" ("pushing hands") and "sanshou" competition.
Philosophy.
The philosophy of Taiji is to keep Yin and Yang in constant flux. When two forces push each other with equal force, neither side moves. It isn't until one yields that motion can occur. Therefore, a key principle in Tai Chi is to avoid using force directly against force (hardness against hardness). Lao Tzŭ provided the archetype for this in the "Tao Te Ching" when he wrote, "The soft and the pliable will defeat the hard and strong."
Conversely, when in possession of leverage, one may want to use hardness to force the opponent to become soft. Traditionally, Tai Chi uses both soft and hard. Yin is said to be the mother of Yang, using a soft power to create a very hard power. 
Traditional schools also emphasize that one is expected to show "wude" ("martial virtue/heroism"), to protect the defenseless, and show mercy to one's opponents.
Training and techniques.
The core training involves two primary features: the first being "taolu" (solo "forms"), a sequence of movements which emphasize a straight spine, abdominal breathing and a natural range of motion; the second being different styles of "tuishou" ("pushing hands") for training movement principles of the form with a partner and in a more practical manner. Traditionally, Taijiquan also has Dan Shi (Single Form Practice) which are drills to practice a specific movement from Taolu.
Solo ("taolu", "neigong" and "qigong").
"Taolu" (solo "forms") is a choreography of movements that serves as the encyclopedia of a martial art. Tai Chi is often characterized by their slow movements in Taolu practice, and one of the reasons this is to develop body connection. Accurate, repeated practice of the solo routine is said to retrain posture, encourage circulation throughout the students' bodies, maintain flexibility through their joints, and further familiarize students with the martial application sequences implied by the various forms. The major traditional styles of tai chi have forms that differ in aesthetics, but there are also many obvious similarities that point to their common origin. The solo forms (empty-hand and weapon) are catalogues of movements that are practised individually in pushing hands and martial application scenarios to prepare students for self-defence training. In most traditional schools, different variations of the solo forms can be practised: fast / slow, small-circle / large-circle, square / round (which are different expressions of leverage through the joints), low-sitting / high-sitting (the degree to which weight-bearing knees are kept bent throughout the form), for example.
Breathing exercises; "neigong" (internal skill) or, more commonly, "qigong" (life energy cultivation) are practiced to develop "qi" (life energy) in coordination with physical movement and "zhan zhuang" (standing like a post) or combinations of the two. These were formerly taught only to disciples as a separate, complementary training system. In the last 60 years they have become better known to the general public.
Qigong versus tai chi.
"Qigong" involves coordinated movement, breath, and awareness used for health, meditation, and martial arts training. While many scholars and practitioners consider tai chi to be a type of "qigong", the two are commonly distinguished as separate but closely related practices, with "qigong" playing an important role in training for tai chi, and with many tai chi movements performed as part of qigong practice. The focus of qigong is typically more on health or meditation than martial applications. Internally the main difference is the flow of "qi". In qigong, the flow of "qi" is held at a gate point for a moment to aid the opening and cleansing of the channels. In tai chi, the flow of "qi" is continuous, thus allowing the development of power for the use by the practitioner.
Partnered ("tuishou" and "sanshou").
Tai chi's martial aspect relies on sensitivity to the opponent's movements and centre of gravity dictating appropriate responses. Effectively affecting the opponent's centre of gravity immediately upon contact is trained as the primary goal of the martial t‘ai-chi ch‘üan student. The sensitivity needed to capture the centre is acquired over thousands of hours of first "yin" (slow, repetitive, meditative, low-impact) and then later adding "yang" (realistic, active, fast, high-impact) martial training through "taolu" (forms), "tuishou" (pushing hands), and "sanshou" (sparring). Tai chi trains in three basic ranges: close, medium and long, and then everything in between. Pushes and open-hand strikes are more common than punches, and kicks are usually to the legs and lower torso, never higher than the hip, depending on style. The fingers, fists, palms, sides of the hands, wrists, forearms, elbows, shoulders, back, hips, knees, and feet are commonly used to strike, with strikes to the eyes, throat, heart, groin, and other acupressure points trained by advanced students. "Chin na", which are joint traps, locks, and breaks are also used. Most tai chi teachers expect their students to thoroughly learn defensive or neutralizing skills first, and a student will have to demonstrate proficiency with them before offensive skills will be extensively trained.
In addition to the physical form, martial tai chi schools also focus on how the energy of a strike affects the other person. A palm strike that looks to have the same movement may be performed in such a way that it has a completely different effect on the target's body. A palm strike that could simply push the opponent backward, could instead be focused in such a way as to lift the opponent vertically off the ground, breaking his/her centre of gravity; or that it could terminate the force of the strike within the other person's body with the intent of causing internal damage.
Most aspects of a trainee's tai chi development are meant to be covered within the partnered practice of "tuishou", and so, "sanshou" (sparring) is not as commonly used as a method of training, but more advanced students sometimes do practice by "sanshou". "Sanshou" is more common to tournaments such as "wushu" tournaments.
Weapons.
Variations of tai chi (taiji) involving weapons also exist.
The weapons training and fencing applications employ:
More exotic weapons still used by some traditional styles include:
Health.
A large number of clinical studies on specific diseases and health conditions exist, but their inconsistent approaches and quality make it hard to draw firm conclusions.
Tai chi has been reported as being useful in treating a number of human ailments, and is supported by a number of associations, including the National Parkinson Foundation and Diabetes Australia. However, medical evidence of effectiveness was lacking and in recent years research has been undertaken to address this. A 2017 systematic review found that it decreased the risk of falls in older people.
A 2011 comprehensive overview of systematic reviews of tai chi recommended tai chi to older people for its various physical and psychological benefits. There was no conclusive evidence of benefit for any of the other conditions researched, including Parkinson's disease, diabetes, cancer and arthritis.
A 2015 systematic review found tai chi could be performed by those with chronic medical conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart failure, and osteoarthritis without worsening shortness of breath and pain, and found favorable effects on functional exercise capacity in people with these conditions.
In 2015 the Australian Government's Department of Health published the results of a review of alternative therapies that sought to determine if any were suitable for being covered by health insurance; t‘ai-chi was one of 17 therapies evaluated and the conclusion was that there is very-low-quality evidence to suggest that tai chi may have some beneficial health effects when compared to control in a limited number of populations for a limited number of outcomes.
Seated tai chi.
Traditional tai chi was originally developed for self-defense, but tai chi has evolved into a graceful form of seated exercise that's now used for stress reduction and a variety of other health conditions. Often described as meditation in motion, seated tai chi promotes serenity through gentle, flowing movements. Worthy of note is the growing popularity of seated tai chi exercises touted by the medical community and researchers. Seated tai chi is based primarily on the Yang short form, and is being used by the general public, medical practitioners, and tai chi instructors in a growing elderly population. It would have been possible to simply take the well-known yang short form and redesign it for seated positions. There is, however, the matter of the integrity of the form itself. Within any tai chi form, there lies a certain inherent logic and purpose to each of the movements. The synchronization of the upper body with the steps and the breathing exists in a very carefully crafted order developed over hundreds of years, and the transition to seated positions is an important factor in the movements themselves. Research has shown that seated tai chi techniques can make big improvements to a person's physical and mental well-being. Marked improvements in balance, blood pressure levels, flexibility and muscle strength, peak oxygen intake, and body fat percentages can be achieved.
Attire and ranking.
In practice traditionally there is no specific uniform required in the practice of tai chi. Modern day practitioners usually wear comfortable, loose T-shirts and trousers made from breathable natural fabrics, that allow for free movement during practice. Despite this, t‘ai-chi ch‘üan has become synonymous with "t‘ai-chi uniforms" or "kung fu uniforms" that usually consist of loose-fitting traditional Chinese styled trousers and a long or short-sleeved shirt, with a Mandarin collar and buttoned with Chinese frog buttons. The long-sleeved variants are referred to as Northern-style uniforms, whilst the short-sleeved, Southern-style uniforms. The colour of this clothing is usually, all white, all black, black and white, or any other colour, mostly being either all a single solid colour or a combination of 2 colours: one colour being the actual clothing and the binding being a contrasting colour. They are normally made from natural fabrics such as cotton or silk. These "uniforms" are not a requirement, but rather are usually worn by masters &amp; professional practitioners during demonstrations, tournaments and other public exhibitions.
There is no standardized tai chi ranking system, except the Chinese Wushu Duan wei exam system run by the Chinese wushu association in Beijing. However, most schools do not use belt rankings. Some schools may present students with belts depicting rank, similar to "dans" in Japanese martial arts. A simple uniform element of respect and allegiance to one's teacher and their methods and community, belts also mark hierarchy, skill, and accomplishment of practice in one school's style and system. During "wushu" tournaments, masters and grandmasters often wear "kung fu uniforms" which tend to have no belts. Wearing a belt signifying rank in such a situation would be unusual.
Tai Chi as a generic brand.
From roughly the mid-1990s onward, tai chi has gained a popularity in some countries to the point of it becoming nearly as known as a health-oriented practice as Yoga. In fact, in modern times it is even more known for such benefits and methods of practice than it is known for its original purpose.
A new phenomenon (since the 2000s) is of various martial arts styles claiming a historical relationship or otherwise with tai chi, because of its popularity. A branch of Lama Pai known as "Tibetan White Crane" had popularized a slow-movement form by naming it "Needle in Cotton" (a common term describing tai chi mechanics), and referring to its practice as "Taiji". However, there is no relationship between these arts, historic or otherwise.
A similar phenomenon occurs with the usage of the art's name as a universal brand for promoting various fitness programs, books and videos. There is, for instance, a book that describes how to use the training principles of Taiji to run better. Regardless of the questions of whether such claims are viable, these are all new trends, which historically were not endorsed or promoted by teachers of the art.

