
Trillium (trillium, wakerobin, tri flower, birthroot, birthwort, and sometimes "wood lily") is a genus of about fifty flowering plant species in the family Melanthiaceae. "Trillium" species are native to temperate regions of North America and Asia, with the greatest diversity of species found in the southern Appalachian Mountains in the southeastern United States.
Description.
Plants of this genus are perennial herbs growing from rhizomes. There are three large leaf-like bracts arranged in a whorl about a scape that rises directly from the rhizome. There are no true aboveground leaves but sometimes there are scale-like leaves on the underground rhizome. The bracts are photosynthetic and are sometimes called leaves. The inflorescence is a single flower with three green or reddish sepals and three petals in shades of red, purple, pink, white, yellow, or green. At the center of the flower there are six stamens and three stigmas borne on a very short style, if any. The fruit is fleshy and capsule-like or berrylike. The seeds have large, oily elaiosomes.
Occasionally individuals have four-fold symmetry, with four bracts (leaves), four sepals, and four petals in the blossom.
Taxonomy.
In 1753, Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus established the genus "Trillium" by recognizing three species, "T. cernuum", "T. erectum", and "T. sessile". The type specimen "T. cernuum" described by Linnaeus was actually "T. catesbaei", an oversight that subsequently led to much confusion regarding the type species of this genus.
Initially the "Trillium" genus was placed in the family Liliaceae, which by 1981 had grown to about 280 genera and 4,000 species. As part of an effort to deconstruct the polyphyletic family Liliaceae, many botanists considered "Trillium" and related genera to constitute a separate family Trilliaceae while others defined family Melanthiaceae for a similar purpose. In 1998, the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group assigned the genus "Trillium", along with genera "Paris" and "Pseudotrillium", to the family Melanthiaceae.
The "Trillium" genus has traditionally been divided into two subgenera, "T." subg. "Trillium" and "T." subg. "Sessilium", based on whether the flowers are pedicellate or sessile (resp.). The former is considered the more primitive group of species. Until recently the sessile-flowered subgenus was known by the name "Phyllantherum", but the name "Sessilium" has precedence and should be used. "T." subg. "Sessilium" has been shown to be a monophyletic group by molecular systematics but its segregation renders the remaining "T." subg. "Trillium" paraphyletic.
All names used in this section are taken from the International Plant Names Index. Unless otherwise noted, the name has been accepted by World Checklist of Selected Plant Families. The geographical locations are taken from the Flora of North America except where noted.
North American taxa.
The following species belong to "T." subg. "Trillium", that is, they bear pedicellate flowers (on a short stalk) but lack mottled leaves.
The following species belong to "T." subg. "Sessilium", that is, they bear sessile flowers (with no stalk) and have mottled leaves.
Asian taxa.
All of the following species belong to "T." subg. "Trillium", that is, they bear pedicellate flowers.
Distribution.
"Trillium" species are native to North America and Asia.
North America.
More than three dozen "Trillium" species are found in North America, most of which are native to eastern North America. Just six species are native to western North America: "T. albidum", "T. angustipetalum", "T. chloropetalum", "T. kurabayashii", "T. ovatum", and "T. petiolatum". Of these, only "T. ovatum" is pedicellate-flowered.
Canada.
"Trillium" species are found across Canada, from Newfoundland to southern British Columbia. The greatest diversity of species are found in Ontario, Quebec, and Nova Scotia.
United States.
Except for the desert regions of the southwestern United States, "Trillium" species are found throughout the contiguous U.S. states. In the western United States, species are found from Washington to central California, east to the Rocky Mountains. In the eastern United States, species range from Maine to northern Florida, west to the Mississippi River valley. "Trillium" species are especially diverse in the southeastern United States, in Georgia, Tennessee, Alabama, North Carolina, and South Carolina. The state of Georgia is home to nineteen species of trillium.
Asia.
In Asia, the range of "Trillium" species extends from the Himalayas across China, Korea, Japan, and eastern Russia to the Kuril Islands. The greatest diversity of "Trillium" species is found on the islands of Japan and Sakhalin.
Identification.
A fully general dichotomous key requires a mature, flowering plant. The first step is to determine whether or not the flower sits on a pedicel, which determines the subgenus. (Any mature plant may be identified to this extent, even if it is not in bloom.) Identification proceeds based on flower parts, leaves, and other characteristics. A combination of characteristics is usually required to identify the plant.
Identification of a non-flowering, non-fruiting plant with bare leaves may be difficult. Although some species of "Trillium" have petioles (leaf stalks) and/or distinctive leaf shapes, these features are seldom sufficient to identify the plant down to the species level.
In eastern North America, jack-in-the-pulpit ("Arisaema triphyllum") is often mistaken for bare-leaved "Trillium". Both species are about the same height with trifoliate leaves but the former lacks 3-way rotational symmetry and has leaf veins unlike those of "Trillium".
Ecology.
Trilliums are myrmecochorous, with ants as agents of seed dispersal. Ants are attracted to the elaiosomes on the seeds and collect them and transport them away from the parent plant. The seeds of "Trillium camschatcense" and "T. tschonoskii", for example, are collected by the ants "Aphaenogaster smythiesi" and "Myrmica ruginodis". Sometimes beetles interfere with the dispersal process by eating the elaiosomes off the seeds, making them less attractive to ants. Vespicochory, seed dispersal by "Vespula" species (yellow jacket hornets), has also been observed for trilliums. The insects carry off the seeds and feed on the elaiosomes.
Conservation.
Picking parts off a trillium plant can kill it even if the rhizome is left undisturbed. Some species of trillium are listed as threatened or endangered and collecting these species may be illegal. Laws in some jurisdictions may restrict the commercial exploitation of trilliums and prohibit collection without the landowner's permission. In the US states of Michigan and Minnesota it is illegal to pick trilliums. In New York it is illegal to pick the red trillium.
In 2009, a Private Members Bill was proposed in the Ontario legislature that would have made it illegal to in any way injure the common "Trillium grandiflorum" (white trillium) in the province (with some exceptions), however the bill was never passed. The rare "Trillium flexipes" (drooping trillium) is also protected by law in Ontario, because of its decreasing Canadian population.
High white-tailed deer population density has been shown to decrease or eliminate trillium in an area, particularly white trillium.
Some species are harvested from the wild to an unsustainable degree. This is particularly dire in the case of "T. govanianum", whose high selling price as a folk medicine has motivated harvesters to destroy swathes of ecologically sensitive Himalayan forests, causing mudslides.
Medicinal uses.
Several species contain sapogenins. They have been used traditionally as uterine stimulants, the inspiration for the common name birthwort. In a 1918 publication, Joseph E. Meyer called it "beth root", probably a corruption of "birthroot". He claimed that an astringent tonic derived from the root was useful in controlling bleeding and diarrhea.
Culture.
The white trillium ("Trillium grandiflorum") serves as the official flower and emblem of the Canadian province of Ontario. It is an official symbol of the Government of Ontario. The large white trillium is the official wildflower of Ohio. In light of their shared connection to the flower, the Major League Soccer teams in Toronto and Columbus compete with each other for the Trillium Cup.
Citizen scientists regularly report observations of "Trillium" species from around the world. "T. grandiflorum", "T. erectum", and "T. ovatum" (in that order) are the most often observed "Trillium" species.
"Trillium" is the literary magazine of Ramapo College of New Jersey, which features poetry, fiction, photography, and other visual arts created by Ramapo students.
In Mexican LGBT culture, the trillium is included as a symbol on their version of the bisexual pride flag.

