
Theism is broadly defined as the belief in the existence of a supreme being or deities. In common parlance, or when contrasted with "deism", the term often describes the classical conception of God that is found in monotheism (also referred to as classical theism) – or gods found in polytheistic religions—a belief in God or in gods without the rejection of revelation as is characteristic of deism.
Atheism is commonly understood as non-acceptance or rejection of theism in the broadest sense of theism, i.e. non-acceptance or rejection of belief in God or gods. The claim that the existence of any deity is unknown or unknowable is agnosticism.
Etymology.
The term "theism" derives from the Greek "theos" or "theoi" meaning "god" or "gods". The term "theism" was first used by Ralph Cudworth (1617–1688). In Cudworth's definition, they are "strictly and properly called Theists, who affirm, that a perfectly conscious understanding being, or mind, existing of itself from eternity, was the cause of all other things".
Types of theism.
Monotheism.
Monotheism (from Greek ) is the belief in theology that only one deity exists.
Some modern day monotheistic religions include Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Baháʼí Faith, Sikhism, Zoroastrianism, Eckankar.
Polytheism.
Polytheism is the belief that there is more than one god.
In practice, polytheism is not just the belief that there are multiple gods; it usually includes belief in the existence of a specific pantheon of distinct deities.
Within polytheism there are "hard" and "soft" varieties:
Polytheism is also divided according to how the individual deities are regarded:
Pantheism and panentheism.
The distinction between these two beliefs may be ambiguous and unhelpful, or a significant point of division. Pantheism may be understood a type of Nontheism, where the physical universe takes on some of the roles of a theistic God, and other roles of God viewed as unnecessary.
Deism.
Deism typically rejects supernatural events (such as prophecies, miracles, and divine revelations) prominent in organized religion. Instead, Deism holds that religious beliefs must be founded on human reason and observed features of the natural world, and that these sources reveal the existence of a supreme being as creator.
Autotheism.
Autotheism is the viewpoint that divinity, whether also external or not, is inherently within 'oneself' and that one has the ability to become godlike. Indian religions like Buddhism and Jainism are Autotheistic. This can be in a selfless way, a way following the implications of statements attributed to ethical, philosophical, and religious leaders (such as Mahavira).
Autotheism can also refer to the belief that one's self is a deity, within the context of subjectivism. Hindus use the term, "aham Brahmāsmi" which means, "I am Brahman".

