
The University of Bergen (, ) is a public university located in Bergen, Norway. The university today serves approximately 17,000 students, and is one of the ten universities in Norway.
History.
Although the university was founded as late as 1946, academic activity had taken place in Bergen since the founding of Bergen Cathedral School in 1153, the Seminarium Fredericianum in 1750 and the establishment of the Royal Norwegian Naval Academy in 1817. Academia and higher education would also be significantly advanced in the city with the establishment of Bergen Museum, later renamed "University Museum of Bergen", in 1825. Founded by Wilhelm Frimann Christie and Jacob Neumann, the museum became a venue for both research and education specialized on natural science, and featured prominent researcher like Michael Sars, Daniel Cornelius Danielssen and Fridtjof Nansen.
Bergen would eventually become a city with several arenas for higher education and research with the Geophysical Institute being established in 1917, the Chr. Michelsen Institute in 1930, the Norwegian School of Economics in 1936 and finally the university in 1946.
Priority areas.
The University of Bergen has three strategic areas
Within these areas, UiB will contribute to society with excellent research, education, interdisciplinary cooperation and dissemination of knowledge and innovation.
Organization.
The University of Bergen has an elected rector, currently Dag Rune Olsen (As of August 1, 2013–present). The university has 7 faculties, the newest being "The Faculty of Fine Art, Music and Design" which was established in 2017. The University of Bergen Library and the University Museum of Bergen have a faculty-like status. Most of the university campus and administration is located in the Nygård neighbourhood, which has resulted in the campus area often being referred to as "Nygårdshøyden" or simply "høyden", meaning "the hill". 
Ranking.
In 2010 the university was ranked as number 135 worldwide by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings, and 181st worldwide by the 2015/16 QS World University Rankings. UiB was also ranked number 148 worldwide in the July 2010 Webometrics Ranking of World Universities. The URAP (University Ranking by Academic Performance) has ranked UiB for 2014/2015 as the 219th worldwide.
Tuition.
The University of Bergen, in common with other Norwegian universities, does not charge tuition fees, which also applies to international students. Students are however required to be members of the student welfare organisation. As of Fall 2015, this fee ("semesteravgift") is NOK 590 (approx. US$ 72) per semester, and provides access to several services, including cultural activities, childcare, refunds for many medical expenses and subsidized accommodation. 40kr of the fee is a donation to the SAIH, a student charity, but this is optional. However most of the students give the donation.
Faculties and academia at the University of Bergen.
Faculty of Fine Art, Music and Design.
The Faculty of Fine Art, Music and Design was established on 1 January 2017. It is composed of the earlier Grieg Academy – Department of Music, and the Bergen Academy of Art and Design.
Faculty of Humanities.
The faculty revised its structure and names in August 2007.
Faculty of Law.
The Faculty of Law was established as a separate faculty in 1980, with legal studies and research having been conducted at the university since 1969. The faculty is one of three Norwegian institutions which offer legal studies, the other two being the law faculties at the University of Oslo and the University of Tromsø. The faculty offers a five-year programme leading to a Master's degree in law and a three-year PhD programme, and currently has approximately 1900 students.
Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences.
As of January 1, 2018, the faculty is organised into the following seven departments:
The Faculty is tied to a number of centres:
Centres of Excellence in Research:
Centres of Research-based Innovation:
Centres of Excellence in Education:
Other important units and centres:
Faculty of Medicine.
Since January 2013 the faculty is organised in the following departments and units:
Faculty of Psychology.
The University of Bergen is the only institution in the Nordic countries where the study of psychology has been assigned to its own faculty. Established in 1980, it educates psychologists and is responsible for the University's pedagogic education.
Other notes.
The University also has an Arboretum and Botanical Garden.

