
In early Germanic paganism, *Wulþuz ("glory") appears to have been an important concept, perhaps personified as a god, or an epithet of an important god; it is continued in Old Norse tradition as Ullr, a god associated with archery.
Literary tradition.
The term "wolþu-" "glory" ("cf". Gothic "wulþus"), possibly in reference to the god, is attested on the 3rd century Thorsberg chape (as "owlþu-"), and there are many placenames in "Ullr" and a related name, Ullinn, but medieval Icelandic sources have only sparse material on the god Ullr. The medieval Norse word was Latinized as Ollerus. Old English "wuldor" stems from another root *"wuldra"-. 
The Icelandic form is "Ullur". In the mainland North Germanic languages, the modern form is "Ull".
The Old English cognate "wuldor" means "glory" but is not used as a proper name, although it figures frequently in kennings for the Christian God such as "wuldres cyning" "king of glory", "wuldorfæder" "glory-father" or "wuldor alwealda" "glorious all-ruler".
Epigraphy.
The Thorsberg chape (a metal piece belonging to a scabbard found in the Thorsberg moor) bears an Elder Futhark inscription, one of the earliest known altogether, dating to roughly AD 200.
"owlþuþewaz / niwajmariz"
The first element "owlþu", for "wolþu-", means "glory", "glorious one", Old Norse "Ullr", Old English "wuldor". The second element, "-þewaz", means "slave, servant". The whole compound is a personal name or title, "servant of the glorious one", "servant/priest of Ullr". "Niwajmariz" means "well-honored".
"Gesta Danorum".
In Saxo Grammaticus' 12th century work "Gesta Danorum", where gods appear euhemerized, "Ollerus" is described as a cunning wizard with magical means of transportation:
When Odin was exiled, Ollerus was chosen to take his place. Ollerus ruled under the name Odin for ten years until the true Odin was called back.
Poetic Edda.
Ullr is mentioned in the poem "Grímnismál" where the homes of individual gods are recounted. The English versions shown here are by Thorpe.
The name "Ýdalir", meaning "yew dales", is not otherwise attested. The yew was an important material in the making of bows, and the word "ýr", "yew", is often used metonymically to refer to bows. It seems likely that the name "Ýdalir" is connected with the idea of Ullr as a bow-god.
Another strophe in "Grímnismál" also mentions Ullr.
The strophe is obscure but may refer to some sort of religious ceremony. It seems to indicate Ullr as an important god.
The last reference to Ullr in the "Poetic Edda" is found in "Atlakviða":
Both "Atlakviða" and "Grímnismál" are often considered to be among the oldest extant Eddic poems. It may not be a coincidence that they are the only ones to refer to Ullr. Again we seem to find Ullr associated with some sort of ceremony, this time that of swearing an oath by a ring, a practice associated with Thor in later sources.
Prose Edda.
In chapter 31 of "Gylfaginning" in the Prose Edda, written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, Ullr is referred to as a son of Sif (with a father unrecorded in surviving sources) and as a stepson of Sif's husband; the major Germanic god Thor:
In "Skáldskaparmál", the second part of the Prose Edda, Snorri mentions Ullr again in a discussion of kennings. Snorri informs his readers that Ullr can be called ski-god, bow-god, hunting-god and shield-god. In turn a shield can be called Ullr's ship. Despite these tantalising tidbits Snorri relates no myths about Ullr. It seems likely that he didn't know any, the god having faded from memory.
Skaldic poetry.
Snorri's note that a shield can be called Ullr's ship is borne out by surviving skaldic poetry with kennings such as "askr Ullar", "far Ullar" and "kjóll Ullar" all meaning Ullr's ship and referring to shields. While the origin of this kenning is unknown it could be connected with the identity of Ullr as a ski-god. Early skis, or perhaps sleds, might have been reminiscent of shields. A late Icelandic composition, "Laufás-Edda", offers the prosaic explanation that Ullr's ship was called "Skjöldr", "Shield".
The name of Ullr is also common in warrior kennings, where it is used as other god names are.
Three skaldic poems, "Þórsdrápa", "Haustlöng" and a fragment by Eysteinn Valdason, refer to Thor as Ullr's stepfather, confirming Snorri's information.
Toponymy.
Ullr's name appears in several important Norwegian and Swedish place names (but not in Denmark or in Iceland). This indicates that Ullr had at some point a religious importance in Scandinavia that is greater than what is immediately apparent from the scant surviving textual references. It is also probably significant that the placenames referring to this god are often found close to placenames referring to another deity: Njörðr in Sweden and Freyr in Norway. Some of the Norwegian placenames have a variant form, "Ullinn". It has been suggested that this is the remnant of a pair of divine twins and further that there may have been a female Ullin, on the model of divine pairs such as Fjörgyn and Fjörgynn. Probably Ullr’s name also can be read in the former Finnish municipality Ullava in Central Osthrobotnia Region. 
Modern reception.
Viktor Rydberg speculates in his "Teutonic Mythology" that Ullr was the son of Sif and Egill-Örvandill, half-brother of Svipdagr-Óðr, nephew of Völundr and a cousin of Skaði. His father, Egill, was the greatest archer in the mythology, and Ullr follows in his father's footsteps. Ullr helped Svipdagr-Eiríkr rescue Freyja from the giants. Rydberg also postulates he also ruled over the Vanir when they held Ásgarðr during the war between the Vanir and the Æsir, however Rudolf Simek states "this has no basis in the sources whatsoever".
Ullr is a playable character in the video game Smite.
Within the winter skiing community of Europe the Old Norse god "Ullr" is considered the Guardian Patron Saint of Skiers (German "Schutzpatron der Skifahrer"). An Ullr medallion or Ullr ski medal, depicting the Scandinavian god Ullr on skis holding a bow and arrow, is widely worn as a talisman by both recreational and professional skiers as well as ski patrols in Europe and elsewhere.
The town of Breckenridge, Colorado hosts a week-long festival called "Ullr Fest" each year in January, featuring numerous events designed to win his favor in an effort to bring snow to the historic ski town. Breck Ullr Fest was first held in 1963.
In the television series "The Almighty Johnsons", Ullr is depicted as a reincarnation of himself, named Mike Johnson, and is played by Tim Balme.
In the game "Totally Accurate Battle Simulator", Ullr is a secret unit with the ability to freeze entire armies.
In the book "Hammered", third book in "The Iron Druid Chronicles", Ullr makes an appearance when the main character and his five man team raid Asgard.

