
USS "Glenard P. Lipscomb" (SSN-685) was a unique nuclear-powered attack submarine of the United States Navy.
The submarine was named after Glenard P. Lipscomb, who served as a representative from California's 24th congressional district from 1953 until his death in 1970.
Design.
"Glenard P. Lipscomb" was the Navy's second submarine design using turbo-electric transmission; the first was the smaller . "Glenard P. Lipscomb" was intended to test the potential advantages of this propulsion system for providing quieter and safer submarine operations for a full sized attack submarine. The "Tullibee" direct current plant had to be scaled up by a factor of six, which resulted in a displacement of 6,400 tons and a length of . "Glenard P. Lipscomb " was thus heavier and larger than similar vessels with conventional drive trains, which resulted in slower speeds. Those disadvantages, along with reliability issues, led to the decision not to use the design for the follow-on s. Other than the engine room, "Glenard P. Lipscomb" was generally similar to the , and although serving as a test platform was a fully combat-capable attack submarine.
Construction.
Construction of "Glenard P. Lipscomb" began on 5 June 1971 at the Electric Boat Company shipyard in Groton, Connecticut. The Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, a long-time colleague and friend of Glenard Lipscomb, spoke at the keel-laying ceremony. "Glenard P. Lipscomb" was launched on 4 August 1973, sponsored by Mrs. Glenard P. Lipscomb, and was commissioned on 21 December 1974 with Commander James F. Caldwell in command.
Career.
"Glenard P. Lipscomb" deployed to the North Atlantic in the fall of 1976, followed immediately by a deployment to the Mediterranean Sea in the winter and spring of 1977. The boat was awarded the Meritorious Unit Commendation.
The submarine deployed to the North Atlantic in the winter and spring of 1978. "Glenard P. Lipscomb" was awarded the Meritorious Unit Commendation. She deployed to the Mediterranean Sea in the winter and spring of 1979.
"Glenard P. Lipscomb" was awarded the Commander, Submarine Development Squadron Twelve, Battle Efficiency [White] "E" and Engineering Excellence [Red] "E" for Fiscal Years 1977, 1978 under the command of Commander Robert B. Wilkinson and 1979, and 1980 under the command of Commander Thomas Robertson.
In 1987, she was involved in a collision with a tugboat in the Cooper River at Naval Weapons Station Charleston. Suffering slight damage to her towed array housing and propeller, she was required to spend an extra week in drydock to facilitate repairs. There were no injuries aboard the submarine; however, the tugboat sank as a result of the collision.
"Glenard P. Lipscomb" was decommissioned and struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 11 July 1990 and disposed of under the submarine recycling program at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard on 1 December 1997.
See also.
Other submarines with unique silencing features

