
Vincent Ward (born 16 February 1956) is a New Zealand film director, screenwriter and artist, who was appointed an Officer of the New Zealand Order of Merit in 2007 for his contribution to film. His films have received international recognition at both the Academy Awards and the Cannes Film Festival. "The Boston Globe" called him "one of film's great image makers", while Roger Ebert, one of America's foremost film critics, hailed him as "a true visionary."
Life and career.
Vincent Ward was born on 16 February 1956 near Greytown, New Zealand. He was educated at St Patrick's College, Silverstream and also trained at Ilam School of Fine Arts at the University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand where he received a Diploma in Fine Arts (with Honours) in 1978 and in 2014 the University awarded him an Honorary Doctorate in Fine Arts and an adjunct professorship.
In 1978, at the age of 21, he shot "A State of Siege", a medium-length film that adapted a novel by his countrywoman Janet Frame. Ward describes 'A State of Siege' as his first "public" film. At least five predated it. Whilst still at art school he had found his interest drifting from painting and sculpture towards filmmaking and animation. The Los Angeles Times reviewed A State of Siege commenting that it was, ‘Rigorously constructed with one exquisitely composed image following another … film becomes poetry’. It won a Special Jury Prize at the Miami Film Festival 1978 and a Golden Hugo Award at the Chicago Film Festival that same year.
In 1978–81, Ward lived on and off in the rugged hills of Te Urewera with an old Tūhoe woman named Puhi and her schizophrenic son Niki. He made a documentary about them called "In Spring One Plants Alone", which won the 1982 Grand Prix at Cinéma du Réel (Paris), and a Silver Hugo at the Chicago Film Festival.
His debut feature-length movie, "Vigil" (1984), follows "a solitary child who imagines, fantasises and dreams". Partly inspired by Ward's partly rural upbringing in the Wairarapa. It was produced by John Maynard and shot in Taranaki after an exhaustive search for the right location, and the right person (Fiona Kay) to play the central role.
Ward's first three feature length films, "Vigil", "" (1988) and "Map of the Human Heart" (1993) were the first films by a New Zealander to be officially selected ‘in competition’ at the Cannes Film Festival. Between them they garnered close to 30 national and international awards (including the Grand Prix at festivals in Italy, Spain, Germany, France and the United States).
After "Vigil", Ward continued working with producer John Maynard and co-wrote and directed "" (1988), a fantasy film which follows a group of 14th-century Cumbrian villagers who tunnel through the earth, and find themselves in modern-day Auckland. Ward describes it as “a collision, a juxtaposition of two time periods which enables you to see your own time through fresh eyes”. Rolling Stone's review hailed it as “A visionary film of rare courage and imperishable heart.” And The New York Times said it was “a thrilling fantasy that places Ward…amongst the most innovative and authoritative young film makers.” The film won the Grand Prix at four film festivals including; Sitges Film Festival, Fanta Film Festival, and Oporto Film Festival 1998/89. And took home Best Film and Best Director at both the Australian and New Zealand film industry awards in 1989.
In 1990, Ward wrote the story for "Alien 3", a proposed sequel to the film "Aliens"; he was the fourth of ten different writers to tackle the "Alien 3" project. Much of the plot and several of the characters from Ward's script, were later fused with the prison setting from David Twohy's proposed script to form the basis of "Alien 3" as it was ultimately made. Ward received a ‘story by’ credit on the final film. The heart of his story, known as ‘the monks in space’ version, was however not captured in the final film and has since been recognised by the London Times Online, who in 2008 gave it the top spot on their list of 'greatest sci-fi movies never made’.
Ward's next film "Map of the Human Heart" (1993) charts the ebbs and flows of a relationship between an Inuit boy, a Métis girl and a visiting British cartographer. Ward and his co-writer Louis Nowra spent time travelling and researching the project together in Canada and Vincent went on to travel extensively in the Arctic before they began writing the script. Ward suffered minor frost bite whilst location scouting in the Arctic that was still visible throughout the shoot. The film stars Jason Scott Lee, Anne Parillaud and Patrick Bergin, and features John Cusack in a minor role. It was produced by Tim Bevan and Ward with Tim White who produced A State of Siege for Ward acting as Australian co-producer. It was screened as a work in progress at Cannes Film Festival in 1992, it was later nominated for best film at the Australian Film Institute Awards. American critic Roger Ebert praised its unpredictability and sense of adventure and said it had "two of the most astonishing romantic scenes I've ever seen in a movie".
In the 1990s Ward spent several years in and out of Hollywood, where he developed multiple projects before he signed on to direct "What Dreams May Come" (1998) a screenplay adapted by Ronald Bass from Richard Matheson's 1978 novel. Ward came up with a new plot idea which allowed him to develop the films unusual painterly look. What Dreams May Come was released in the United States on 2,600 screens and starred Robin Williams, Annabella Sciorra, Cuba Gooding Jr. and Max von Sydow. It got ‘two enthusiastic thumbs up’ from Siskel and Ebert who lauded it as ‘one of the great visual achievements in film history’. Overall reviews were divided amongst critics. It reached US$90 million in theatrical sales and performed strongly in the video market, with long term reach winning a Best Renting Drama Award with Video Ezy. The film was nominated for Best Production Design and Best Visual Effects at the 1999 Academy Awards and won an Oscar for visual effects. It continues to be popular with audiences scoring 84% on Rotten Tomatoes, 7.1/10 stars on IMDb and 4.7/5 stars on Amazon where is ranks highly with viewers.
The 2003 epic, "The Last Samurai" was based on a project Ward spent four years developing with the films producers. Eventually, after Ward approached several directors, including Francis Ford Coppola and Peter Weir, he got Edward Zwick to helm the film. Ward was an executive producer of the film.
During his time in Hollywood, Ward became interested in acting and trained under acting coach Penny Allen. He had a small part in Mike Figgis’ film "Leaving Las Vegas" (1995), and a larger role in Figgis’ next film "One Night Stand" (1997). He was given one of the leading role in a US independent feature film "The Shot" (1996), and a role in Geoff Murphy's film "Spooked" (2004).
In 2005, he returned to New Zealand and made "River Queen". The film won respectable audiences at home, but initial reviews were disappointing, and tales of the troubled winter shoot dominated the film's release.
"Rain of the Children" followed in 2008, wherein Ward retells the story of Puhi, the elderly Tuhoe woman who was the subject of his earlier documentary "In Spring One Plants Alone". Chosen by the audience from among 250 feature films, "Rain of the Children" won the Grand Prix at Era New Horizons Film Festival. The film was nominated for best director and won best composer at the Qantas Film and TV Awards in New Zealand. Vincent Ward was also nominated for best director at the Australian Directors Guild Awards.
Ward has had 2 full retrospectives of his films. In 1984 at Germany's Hof International Film Festival and in 2008 at Poland's Era New Horizons Film Festival.
Since 2010 Ward has launched a second career as a painter and video artist whilst still actively developing new film projects. In 2012 Rhana Devenport curated, "Breath", a major solo show of Ward's paintings and video work at New Zealand's cutting edge public gallery, the Govett-Brewster Art Gallery/Len Lye Centre in New Plymouth. This was followed by two other public gallery showings in Auckland and a solo pavilion at the 9th Shanghai Biennale 2012.
In October 2020, filming began in Ukraine on Ward's new feature "Storm School" with further shooting planned in China, UK and Australia in the new year. It is based on a script cowritten by Ward and long term collaborator Louis Nowra.
Painting and photography.
In 2010 Craig Potton Publishing published "Vincent Ward: The Past Awaits", part mid-career chronicle and part large-format film photo book. The book collects together images from all of his feature films, including "Vigil", "The Navigator: A Medieval Odyssey", "Map of the Human Heart", "What Dreams May Come", "River Queen" and "Rain of the Children", as well as earlier films and others developed but never made. Interwoven with the images in "The Past Awaits" is also a part-memoir in which Ward writes about the people he has worked with, both behind and in the films. He says: "This book is about the search to stay whole through making films, of being inspired by the people I have worked with and made films about, and how by seeing these lives it is perhaps easier to see more clearly into my own." German filmmaker Wim Wenders said of the book:
I don't know if ever a book of pictures and stories moved me so much like Vincent Ward's "The Past Awaits". It will go into my suitcase for that lonesome island.
While his fellow New Zealand filmmaker Peter Jackson said:
To read "The Past Awaits" is to take a journey, not just into the imagination of Vincent Ward, but into his heart and soul. These images have a power and strength that goes way beyond the context of the film they belong to. They present the spirit of New Zealand.
In 2011-2012 Ward launched his art career alongside his filmmaking. In an 8-month period he had three solo exhibitions at public art galleries. These shows included large-scale painting, print, photographic and cinematic installation work. In 2011 he presented Breath an exhibition of paintings, photographs and cinematic installations at the Govett-Brewster Art Gallery/ Len Lye Centre in New Plymouth. This was followed by the 2012 Auckland twin solo exhibitions "Inhale" and "Exhale" at the Gus Fisher Gallery and TSB Bank Wallace Arts Centre, respectively. To celebrate the dual exhibitions Gow-Langsford Gallery also showed his video work in their Wellesley Street Window. This same year Ron Sang Publishing published Inhale | Exhale, a 180-page large format art book to coincide with Ward's twin Auckland shows. To culminate the year Ward was invited to the 9th Shanghai Biennale 2012. He was New Zealand's first entrants to the Biennale and held a solo pavilion show in an historic cathedral on the Bund that was called Auckland Station: Destinies Lost and Found.
Art writer and reviewer Anthony Byrt (Art Forum) described the work as “intense… stunning… virtuosic” and said “Ward has never shied away from the truth: he digs and digs until he gets somewhere other filmmakers and artists don't often visit: a psychic space where violence, memory, myth, sex and religion mingle in a landscape scarred by history”
Rhana Devenport, director Govett-Brewster Art Gallery, wrote in her catalog for the exhibition: Ward's ongoing concerns with metamorphosis, falling, light, fear, memory, darkness and the transformative moment have led him to create a series of vast, physically imposing works that delve into other-worldly landscapes and transcendent states, to evocations of loss, redemption and unconscious realms.&lt;/ref&gt; on The Bund.
Four years on from the Shanghai show, Ward revealed a new series of work at Trish Clark Gallery  in Auckland, Palimpsest / Landscapes (30 August – 23 September 2016). And more recently Loom (4 June — July 20, 2019).
In 2014 Ward received and honorary Doctorate in Fine Arts from the University of Canterbury, Christchurch and an adjunct professorship. In 2015 he held a guest professorship at the China Academy of Art, in Hanzhou, as well as spending five weeks on residency at the Shanghai University School of Fine Arts.
Awards and honours.
His films have earned critical acclaimed and festival attention.

