
The is one of the traditionally made Japanese swords ("") worn by the samurai in feudal Japan.
History and use.
The production of swords in Japan is divided into specific time periods:
The "wakizashi" has a blade between in length. "Wakizashi" close to the length of a "katana" are called "ō-wakizashi" and "wakizashi" closer to "tantō" length are called "ko-wakizashi". "Wakizashi" are not necessarily just a smaller version of the "katana"; they could be forged differently and have a different cross section.
"Wakizashi" have been in use as far back as the 15th or 16th century. The "wakizashi" was used as a backup or auxiliary sword; it was also used for close quarters fighting, to behead a defeated opponent and sometimes to commit seppuku. The "wakizashi" was one of several short swords available for use by samurai including the "yoroi tōshi", and the "chisa-katana". The term "wakizashi" did not originally specify swords of any official blade length and was an abbreviation of "wakizashi no katana" ("sword thrust at one's side"); the term was applied to companion swords of all sizes. 
During the Edo period, the Tokugawa shogunate required samurai to wear "Katana" and shorter swords in pairs. These short swords were "wakizashi" and "tanto", and "wakizashi" were mainly selected. The "wakizashi" being worn together with the "katana" was the official sign that the wearer was a samurai or swordsman. When worn together the pair of swords were called "daishō", which translates literally as "big-little". Only "samurai" could wear the "daishō": it represented their social power and personal honour. During this period, townspeople ("Chōnin") and peasants were allowed to wear one legal-length "ko-wakizashi", which made it popular for the general public to wear wakizashi. This was common when traveling because of the risk of encountering bandits. "Wakizashi" were worn on the left side, secured to the waist sash (""). It was not until the Edo period in 1638 when the rulers of Japan tried to regulate the types of swords and the social groups which were allowed to wear them that the lengths of "katana" and "wakizashi" were officially set.
Kanzan Satō, in his book titled "The Japanese Sword", notes that there did not seem to be any particular need for the "wakizashi" and suggests that the "wakizashi" may have become more popular than the "tantō" because it was more suited for indoor fighting. He mentions the custom of leaving the "katana" at the door of a castle or palace when entering while continuing to wear the "wakizashi" inside.

