
Wing Chun Kuen (), usually called Wing Chun (詠春), is a concept-based traditional Southern Chinese Kung fu (wushu) style and a form of self-defense, that requires quick arm movements and strong legs to defeat opponents. Softness (via relaxation) and performance of techniques in a relaxed manner is fundamental to Wing Chun.
Per Ip Man, "Chi Sau in Wing Chun is to maintain one's feeling of opponent's movement by staying relaxed all the while keeping in the strength to fight back, much like the flexible nature of bamboo".
History.
Origins of Wing Chun remain unclear, as Wing Chun has been passed from teacher to student verbally rather than in writing, making it difficult to confirm (or clarify) differing accounts of the martial art's creation.
For a long time, Wing Chun's creation had been attributed to Ng Mui, one of the legendary Five Elders. According to a popular legend, after being inspired by witnessing a crane and a snake fighting, Ng Mui incorporated their movements into her style of Chinese kung fu to form a new, yet-unnamed martial art system. Later, Ng Mui would teach this art to a woman named Yim Wing-chun who used it to as a means to defend herself against unwanted advances and latter's name would also become the name of this style.
Another, more concrete account is that Wing Chun was developed by people associated with the Red Boat Opera Company, a group of traveling Cantonese opera singers who toured China in the late 1800s and early 1900s who formed a popular uprising against the Qing Dynasty. Nearly all extant lineages of Wing Chun (except the Pao Fa Lien and Hek Ki Boen branches) claim to descend from the members of the mid-19th-century Red Boat Opera Company.
Characteristics.
Wing Chun favors a relatively high, narrow stance with the elbows close to the body. Within the stance, arms are generally positioned across the vitals of the centerline with hands in a vertical "wu sau" ("protecting hand" position). This style positions the practitioner to make readily placed blocks and fast-moving blows to vital striking points down the center of the body; neck, chest, belly and groin. Shifting or turning within a stance is done on the heels, balls, or middle (K1 or Kidney 1 point) of the foot, depending on lineage. Some Wing Chun styles discourage the use of high kicks because this risks counter-attacks to the groin. The practice of "settling" one's opponent to brace them more effectively against the ground helps one deliver as much force as possible to them.
Relaxation.
Softness (via relaxation) and performance of techniques in a relaxed manner, and by training the physical, mental, breathing, energy and force in a relaxed manner to develop Chi "soft wholesome force", is fundamental to Wing Chun. On "softness" in Wing Chun, Ip Man during an interview said:
Wing Chun is in some sense a "soft" school of martial arts. However, if one equates that work as weak or without strength, then they are dead wrong. Chi Sau in Wing Chun is to maintain one's flexibility and softness, all the while keeping in the strength to fight back, much like the flexible nature of bamboo". 
Forms.
Most common forms.
The most common system of forms in Wing Chun consists of three empty hand forms, two weapon forms, and a wooden dummy form.
Other forms.
Empty Hand.
Both the Wai Yan (Weng Chun) and Nguyễn Tế-Công branches use different curricula of empty hand forms. The Tam Yeung and Fung Sang lineages both trace their origins to Leung Jan's retirement to his native village of Gu Lao, where he taught a curriculum of San Sik.
The Siu Lim Tau of Wing Chun is one long form that includes movements that are comparative to a combination of Siu Lim Tau, Chum Kiu, and Biu Ji of other families. The other major forms of the style are: Jeui Da (), Fa Kyun (), Jin Jeung (), Jin Kyun (), Jeui Kyun (), Sap Saam Sau (), and Chi Sau Lung ().
Also, a few family styles of Wing-Chun (especially those coming from the Hung Syun Hei Baan () have an advanced combination form called Saam Baai Fat () which includes many flow/leak techniques from all of the first 'standard' 7 forms. Old phonetics in Cantonese; "Hung Sun Hay Ban Tong" Red Boat Opera Organization/Troop has a branch in Girard, Ohio ran by Si-Fu Mark Lee Pringle. They are one of the few schools that teach the full 8-form curriculum including the Yoo-Choy( old phonetics ) family-style of 'Saam Baai Fut' 3 Bows to Buddha.
Wooden Dummy.
The Star Dummy consists of three poles that are embedded into the ground in a triangle with each pole an arms span apart. The associated form consists of kicking the poles using the various kicks found in Wing Chun: front kick, front kick with the foot pointed out using the broad area of the foot and knee rotation to outside, and sidekick.
Weapons.
The Yuen Kay Shan / Sum Nung branch also historically trained to throw darts (Biu).
San Sik.
San Sik (Chinese: 散式; Cantonese Yale: Sáan Sīk; pinyin: Sǎn Shì; literally: 'Casual Style') are compact in structure. They can be loosely grouped into three broad categories:
1. Focus on building body structure through basic punching, standing, turning, and stepping drills.
2. Fundamental arm cycles and changes, firmly ingraining the cardinal tools for interception and adaptation.
3. Sensitivity training and combination techniques.
Sensitivity training.
Wing Chun includes several sensitivity drills designed to train and obtain specific responses. Although they can be practiced or expressed in a combat form, they should not be confused with actual sparring or fighting.
Chi Sau.
Chi Sau () is a term for the principle and drills used for the development of automatic reflexes upon contact and the idea of "sticking" to the opponent (also known as "sensitivity training"). In reality, the intention is not to "stick" to your opponent at all costs, but rather to protect your centerline while simultaneously attacking your opponent's centerline. In Wing Chun, this is practiced by two practitioners maintaining contact with each other's forearms while executing techniques, thereby training each other to sense changes in body mechanics, pressure, momentum and "feel". The increased sensitivity gained from this drill helps a practitioner attack and counter an opponent's movements precisely, quickly, and with appropriate techniques. The center-line principle is a core concept in Wing Chun Kung Fu. You want to protect your own center-line while controlling your opponent’s. You do this with footwork. Understanding the center-line will allow you to instinctively know where your opponent is.
Chi Sau additionally refers to methods of rolling hands drills (). Luk Sau participants push and "roll" their forearms against each other in a single circle while trying to remain in a relaxed form. The aim is to feel the force, test resistance, and find defensive gaps. Other branches have a version of this practice where each arm rolls in small, separate circles. Luk Sau is most notably taught within the Pan Nam branch of Wing Chun where both the larger rolling drills as well as the smaller, separate-hand circle drills are taught.
Some lineages, such as Ip Man and Jiu Wan, begin Chi Sau drills with one-armed sets called Daan Chi Sau () which help the novice student to get the feel of the exercise. In Daan Chi Sau each practitioner uses one hand from the same side as they face each other.
Chi Geuk.
Chi Geuk () is the lower-body equivalent of the upper body's Chi Sau training, aimed at developing awareness in the lower body and obtaining relaxation of the legs.
In popular culture.
Donnie Yen played the role of Wing Chun Grandmaster Ip Man in the 2008 movie "Ip Man", which was a box office success, and in its sequels "Ip Man 2", "Ip Man 3," and "Ip Man 4". Max Zhang (Zhang Jin) who played the role of Cheung Tin Chi in "Ip Man 3" starred in a spin-off and direct sequel movie called "", which follows the events after the end of "Ip Man 3".
Tony Leung Chiu-wai played the role of Wing Chun Grandmaster IP Man in the 2013 film "The Grandmaster", which received 41 awards and nominations. "The Grandmaster" has earned HK$21,156,949 (US$2.7 million) at the Hong Kong box office, and grossed over 312 million yuan (US$50 million) at the mainland Chinese box office, $6,594,959 USD in North America, becoming the highest-grossing film for director Wong Kar-wai.
Stephen Amell on the CW show "Arrow" has incorporated Wing Chun into his fighting style; his character practices on a Muk Yan Jong (wooden dummy).
In December 2019, a new Wing Chun using fighter named Leroy Smith was introduced to the fighting game "Tekken 7" roster as downloadable content. When creating characters to represent real-world martial arts, the developers wanted to introduce a new fighter utilizing Wing Chun. The developers consulted Ip Man's nephew, who provided motion capture for the character. 

