Atlantic hurricane seasons
1770s 1780s 1790s 1800s 1810s The decade of 1790s featured the 1790–1799 Atlantic hurricane seasons. While info for every storm that happened is not available, some parts of the coastline were had enough people to give info of hurricane happenings. Each season was an ongoing event in the annual cycle of tropical cyclone formation in the Atlantic basin. Most tropical cyclone formation is between June 1 and November 30.
1790 Atlantic hurricane season.
No tropical systems were reported this season.
1791 Atlantic hurricane season.
I. A hurricane hit Western Cuba on June 21. It moved slowly over the island, reaching the Gulf of Mexico on the 22nd. The hurricane caused 3,000 deaths, as well as crop and animal damage.
II. A hurricane struck the Lower Texas Coast some time this season, flooding Padre Island and the mainland nearby. A herd of 50,000 cattle belonging to a Spanish cattle baron drowned in the storm surge.
1792 Atlantic hurricane season.
The Lesser Antilles were hit by a hurricane on August 1, destroying several ships.
1793 Atlantic hurricane season.
I. On August 13, a slow moving hurricane approached the Virgin Islands. It left the island chain three days later, after killing 28 people.
I or II. During August, a tropical storm hit southern Louisiana, causing crop damage and minor flooding. It is possible this storm was related to the previous storm.
1794 Atlantic hurricane season.
I. A tropical storm hit Jamaica on June 27, destroying at least one ship. A month later, a hurricane hit the island, causing "many deaths".
II. From July 4-6, rain was reported at Annapolis by William Faris in his diary. On the night of the 5th, it "raind and Blowd very Hard" (sic) all night. It finally cleared out between 10 and 11 am on the 6th.
III. Cuba was hit by a hurricane on August 27, resulting in around 100 deaths. It continued across the Gulf of Mexico, and hit near New Orleans, Louisiana on the 31st. There, heavy flooding, high winds, crop damage, and unusually large hail occurred. "Many deaths" occurred in Louisiana from this hurricane.
IV. In early October, a hurricane caused damage and erosion to northeastern Florida.
V. Between October 25 and October 26 a storm, possibly a hurricane, caused of rain at Madison's Montpelier estate. While the wind there was "brisk" on the morning on the 26th, Annapolis reported that "it Blow'd very Hard a near Hurrican and rained all night" from the 26th into the 27th.
1795 Atlantic hurricane season.
I. A hurricane passed through North Carolina on August 2. It brought heavy rain through the mid-Atlantic, disrupting mail service and damaging crops. "A fleet of eighteen Spanish ships, sailing from Havana to Spain, was struck off Cape Hatteras; an undisclosed number of these ships were lost." At Annapolis, rain set it on the afternoon of the 2nd, before it escalated later in the day, when it "Blow'd a Harrican." Trees were levelled and the tide was so high that "one could not get to the Market House with out a Boat." Vessels were driven ashore by the tempest (from the diary of William Faris).
II. Ten days after the previous storm, another hurricane, this time a major hurricane, hit central North Carolina. It continued northwestward across the state, causing additional flooding and crop damage, the damage could be "Modestly estimated at a year's rent", quoted by Thomas Jefferson. The "powerful torrent" of rain in Petersburg caused creeks to rise higher than noted in the previous 70 years (North Carolina Journal). Winds were gusty at Farmville, where a "great fresh" was reported. Annapolis reported strong winds and rains on August 13th as well.
1796 Atlantic hurricane season.
The Bahamas experienced a hurricane from October 2 to October 3, resulting in delays in shipping.
1797 Atlantic hurricane season.
I. North Carolina was hit by a hurricane on September 5, resulting in the sinking of one ship.
II. On October 15, a hurricane moved across the Bahamas. It turned northward, and hit near Charleston, South Carolina on the 19th. Many ships and lives were reported lost.
1798 Atlantic hurricane season.
No tropical systems were reported this season.
1799 Atlantic hurricane season.
27 people were killed from a hurricane on September 23 in Jamaica. It remained offshore, but rain, flooding, and winds were strong enough to result in the deaths.
