The 1995 Atlantic hurricane season was the time from June 1 to November 30, 1995 when hurricanes officially formed in the Atlantic Ocean. Storms sometimes form before and after these dates but most storms form during the season. No storms formed after November 30 in the 1995 season.
The 1995 season was extremely active, largely due to favorable conditions including a La Niña and warm sea surface temperatures. Nineteen named storms formed during the season, making it the third most active on record behind the 2005 and 1933 seasons and tied with 1887 season. There were also eleven storms that reached hurricane strength, again the third most hurricanes in one season after the 1969 and 2005 seasons.
This season broke the record for the most Tropical Cyclones at a time in the Atlantic with five storm at a time from August 22 to September 1 — Humberto, Iris, Jerry, Karen, and Luis, were the names of the storms at the same time.
Tropical Depression Six.
On August 4, Tropical Depression Six formed in the Bay of Campeche. Six made landfall in over Mexico and dissipated on August 6, never reaching tropical storm strength. There were no reports of damage or deaths.
Tropical Storm Gabrielle.
Tropical Storm Gabrielle formed on August 9 and nearly became a hurricane but it made landfall in Mexico, near La Pesca, Tamaulipas, on August 11. Tropical Storm Gabrielle dissapated the next day without ever reaching hurricane status causing no damage or deaths.
Tropical Storm Jerry.
Tropical Storm Jerry formed just off the Florida coast near Andros Island on August 23 as Tropical Depression Eleven. Jerry made landfall at as a very weak tropical storm. Jerry made landfall in Jupiter, Florida. Jerry dissapated on the 28th over Georgia.
Hurricane Luis.
Hurricane Luis was one of the most powerful storms of the very active 1995 Atlantic hurricane season. Hurricane Luis was the strongest storm to hit the Leeward Islands since Hurricane Hugo in 1989. Luis was one of the four tropical cyclones active from August 22 to September 1 along with Humberto, Iris, Jerry, and Karen.
Hurricane Tanya.
The 1995 season ended with Hurricane Tanya, the first storm to be get a name beginning with 'T' since hurricane naming began in the Atlantic basin in 1950 it was the only until Tropical Storm Tammy in 2005.
