2 Girls 1 Cup is a copy of the trailer for "Hungry Bitches", a pornographic film made by MFX-Media. The video stars two women defecating into a cup. They each eat the excrement, and throw up into each other's mouths. "Lovers Theme" from Hervé Roy's Romantic Themes album released by Tele Music in 1992 plays throughout.
This one-minute video is an Internet popular video that became a well-known Internet subject among bloggers and Internet forums for its viewers reaction to the content. Around mid-October 2007, video sites such as YouTube were flooded with videos depicting others' reactions to watching the video for the first time.
Origin.
The video came from a Brazilian, Marco Fiorito, who talks of himself as a "compulsive fetishist". Fiorito first produced foot fetish videos but soon moved on to. The film was made by MFX-Video, one of several businesses owned by Fiorito. Fiorito says his films are legal in Brazil, but authorities in the United States have branded some of his films as dirty and filed charges against Danilo Croce, a Brazilian lawyer living in Florida, listed as an officer of a company shipping Fiorito's films in the United States. Croce accepted a plea bargain and was sentenced to 3 years of unsupervised probation and forfeiture of $98,000. Fiorito claimed he did not know his films were illegal in the United States and that his films often contained chocolate instead of poo to appease some of his actors who were willing to appear in scat films but not actually eat fecal matter.
The first few seconds of the 2 Girls 1 Cup video contain the text "MFX 1209" (the product code for "Hungry Bitches") and the URL mfxvideos.com, the website of Fiorito's MFX-Video, leading some in the media to incorrectly believe the video is one of the many Croce had to surrender to the Department of Justice but was somehow leaked in the process.
Reactions.
2 Girls 1 Cup's spread because of the reactions it causes. Hundreds of videos exist on YouTube of users showing the original video to their friends and recording their reactions. Even Joe Rogan, host of "Fear Factor", a show known for for the nasty things its players eat, had to turn away in a reaction video posted to his blog. A reaction video starring Kermit the Frog proved very popular on the Digg. In January 2008, "Slate" magazine wrote about the reaction video with a slideshow about the reactions.
Violet Blue, an author, stated this website as becoming "the new 'tubgirl' and goatse all in one nasty moment of choco-poo-love" in a "San Francisco Chronicle" article.
