Abide with Me is a religious song or hymm. It was written by Henry Lyte in 1847. The hymm was sung at the wedding of King George VI of the United Kingdom and the wedding of Queen Elizabeth II. The song is sung at the start of the FA Cup finals.
English.
Abide with me; fast falls the eventide;
The darkness deepens; Lord with me abide.
When other helpers fail and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, O abide with me.
Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
Earth’s joys grow dim; its glories pass away;
Change and decay in all around I see;
O Thou who changest not, abide with me.
Not a brief glance I beg, a passing word;
But as Thou dwell’st with Thy disciples, Lord,
Come not to sojourn, but abide with me.
Come not in terrors, as the King of kings,
But kind and good, with healing in Thy wings,
Tears for all woes, a heart for every plea—
Come, Friend of sinners, and thus bide with me.
Thou on my head in early youth didst smile;
And, though rebellious and perverse meanwhile,
Thou hast not left me, oft as I left Thee,
On to the close, O Lord, abide with me.
I need Thy presence every passing hour.
What but Thy grace can foil the tempter’s power?
Who, like Thyself, my guide and stay can be?
Through cloud and sunshine, Lord, abide with me.
I fear no foe, with Thee at hand to bless;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness.
Where is death’s sting? Where, grave, thy victory?
I triumph still, if Thou abide with me.
Hold Thou Thy cross before my closing eyes;
Shine through the gloom and point me to the skies.
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee;
In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me.
French.
Reste avec nous, Seigneur, le jour décline,
La nui s’approche et nous menace tous;
Reste avec nous, Seigneur, reste avec nous!
En toi nos coeurs ont salué leur Maître,
En toi notre âme a trouvé son époux;
Reste avec nous, Seigneur, reste avec nous!
Les vains bonheurs de ce monde infidèle
N’enfantent rien que regrets ou dégoûts;
Reste avec nous, Seigneur, reste avec nous!
Dans nos combat si ta main nous délaisse,
Satan vainqueur nous tiendra sous ses coups;
Reste avec nous, Seigneur, reste avec nous!
Sous ton regard la joie est sainte et bonne,
Près de ton coeur les pleurs même sont doux,
Soit que ta main nous frappe ou nous couronne,
Reste avec nous, Seigneur, reste avec nous!
Et quand, au bout de pèlerinage,
Nous partirons pour le grand rendezvous,
Pour nous guider dans ce dernier passage,
Reste avec nous, Seigneur, reste avec nous!
Foroyskt.
Ver tú mær hjá, nú sólin fór um sýn,
og dagur aftnar, kæri Harri mín!
Tá onnur hjálp og uggan fellur frá,
hjálp teirra hjálparleysu, ver mær hjá!
tá fánar dýrdin øll við heimsins sund.
Alt ridlar leyst, sum eyga mítt kann sjá,
o, tú, sum broytist ei, ver tú mær hjá!
Ber ei sum drottin ræðslu í mítt sinn,
men brosa blíðan, kín mær tár av kinn!
Lat meg hjá tær, við djúpu sálartrá,
mær finna ugga, Guð mín, ver mær hjá!
Mær tørvar tína hjálp hvønn lívsins dag.
Bert náði tín kann doyva fjandans slag.
Hvør er sum tú? í ódn og sólskinsbrá,
mín stavur og mín stuðul, ver mær hjá!
Við tær í fylgi aldri óttist eg.
í sorg og sjúku ber tað trygdarveg.
á gravarskugga, deyða, sum tú vá,
eg vinni sigur, um tú ert mær hjá.
Tá eygað sloknar, krossin vís tú mær,
lýs gjøgnum myrkrið mær í himnagarð!
Rým jarðarnátt—nú lýsing er at sjá!
í lív’ og deyða, Guð mín, ver mær hjá!
Italian.
Rendimi intento tutto al Tuo Timor;
Per l’evangel desiro in Te abbondar
Di carità, di fé, di speme ognor.
La Tua parola scrivi nel mio cuor;
Altro non v’è che possa consolar;
Per essa sola sento in Te vigor.
Con tutto il cuor, deh, fammi camminar
Ripieno di virtù nei Tuoi sentier.
Nel nome Te lo chiedo di Gesù.
