Ahmadiyya ("Ahmadiyya") is a movement founded in the 19th Century by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad from Qadian (Punjab, India). It was started before India was split into the modern day states of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Ahmad wanted to make small changes, or reforms, to Islam. In 1914, the movement split into two different groups, over a question of who should become the next Caliph. Both groups still exist today.
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad was an important religious leader. He claimed to have fulfilled the prophecies about the world reformer of the end times. Such things were told in the stories and writings of many World religions. These stories call the reformer the Mujaddid (divine reformer) of the 14th Islamic century, the promised Messiah (“Second Coming of Christ”) or Mahdi.
Ahmadis consider themselves Muslims and claim to practice the Islam that was taught and practised by Muhammad and his followers. Mirza Ghulam Ahmad founded the movement in 1889 and named it the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. His goal was to restore life into Islam.
The original Ahmadiyya movement split into two separate groups after the death of Nooruddin, the first successor of Ghulam Ahmad.
These movements are the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community (AMJ) and the smaller Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement for the Propagation of Islam ("Ahmadiyya Anjuman Ishaat-i-Islam", AAIIL). The groups have different interpretations of Ahmad's teachings and claims. They also have different opinions on who should have come after Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, and how this person should be chosen.
The larger faction of the Ahmadiyya Movement, known as the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community is active in 190 countries of the world. The International Headquarters of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community is currently in London, England. Further, they have created a place called "Islamabad" in Tilford Surrey; the London Mosque; and also Western Europe’s biggest mosque, the Baitul Futuh “House of Victories” in Morden, south-west London.
The smaller faction, known as the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement, is active in 17 countries of the world. They are most notable in Germany, Australia and Pakistan. The International Headquarters of the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement is in the town of Lahore, Pakistan where the Lahore Movement started. Within Lahore, Pakistan, are the "Ahmadiyya Buildings Lahore" which act as the international administrative base for the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement.
The views of Ahmadiyya are controversial to popular Islam. The majority of Muslims have not accepted Mirza Ghulam Ahmad’s claims. They do not consider Ahmadis to be Muslims. Controversial points include the Ahmadiyya view on the death and return of Jesus and their concept of Jihad. The Ahmadiyya community also has a different interpretation of verse [Qur'an 33:40] of the Qur'an. This verse talks about the finality of Muhammad. The members of the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement are not subject to such criticism because they do not believe in Mirza Ghulam Ahmad was a prophet. For this reason, they are more close to traditional mainstream Islam. Ahmadis (particularly the members of the International Ahmadiyya Muslim Community) argue that their beliefs are in accordance with Islam, and using arguments from the Qur'an, Hadith and opinion of Islamic jurists and theologians, challenge the contention of the groups calling them non-Muslims.
