The Age of Enlightenment was an eighteenth century cultural movement in Europe. It had its center in France and there it was led by philosophers like Voltaire and Denis Diderot. Diderot spread the enlightenment's ideas with the Encyclopédie, the first big public book of reference.
The most important idea of the Enlightenment was the belief in people's reason. All people are capable of thinking for themselves. Therefore, you shouldn't uncritically believe in things those in power and other authorities claim. You don't even have to believe what the church are teaching or what the priests are preaching. Another important thought was that the society is best developed by equal humans in cooperation. It was thought that the special rights and privilege of the nobility therefore should be abolished.
This were dangerous thoughts for those in power, and many enlightenment philosophers were at times in prison or were forced to go into exile. The ideas of the Age of Enlightenment also contributed to the French revolution 1789. But some regents took impression of the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment and carried reforms through in their countries, but they kept the power for themselves. Examples of these so called "enlightened absolutists" includes Catherine the Great of Russia, Frederick the Great of Prussia and Gustav III of Sweden.
During this period of time the Enlightenment many people began to use reason. People became to disagree with the idea that God created the world. This brought on conflicts and later on war. The Enlightenment is held to be the source of critical ideas, such as the centrality of freedom, democracy and reason as primary values of society. This view argues that the establishment of a contractual basis of rights would lead to the mechanism and capitalism, the scientific method, religious tolerance, and the organization of states into self-governing republics through democratic means. In this view, the tendency of the philosophies in particular to apply rationality to every problem is considered the essential change. From this point on, thinkers and writers were held to be free to pursue the truth in whatever form, without the threat of violating established ideas.
The Enlightenment also had an effect on Many of the Founding Fathers of America. They were influenced by Enlightenment ideas of duties and role of government for the people.
