Atreyu are an American Heavy metal band. They are signed to Roadrunner Records. They took their name from a character called "Atreyu" in a book called "The Neverending Story".Sound Tracks
'Atreyu' is an American metal core band with melodic death metal and hardcore influences from Orange County, California. Contrary to popular belief, the band did not intentionally name itself after Atreyu, a character from Michael Ende's novel, The Never-ending Story. Rather, the name was suggested to them by a friend of the band. Most people when they have never even heard of this band think that the person asking if they listen to Atreyu they are thinking of the movie The Never Ending Story. When I first heard of the band name that is what I thought as well.
Atreyu is one of the bands that I really like because the music that they play sometimes is good and at other times it is not so good, this is a band with extreme talent and have really come along since they first started. When they first started playing the music they did not very many people liked them. They needed to get up off their feet and get the ball rolling down the hill.
The metal core music that they play is sometimes very easy to listen to and at other times it can be harder to listen and pick out the words that they are saying.
Atreyu was formed as a band sometime during 1998 and 1999. Shortly thereafter, they released their first EP, entitled Visions. The record garnered the band some success in the Southern California metal core scene and they constantly performed to support the seven-track release.
Atreyu released its second record, a five-track EP, entitled Fractures in the Facade of Your Porcelain Beauty, in 2001. The record featured early versions of the songs "Living Each Day Like You're Already Dead", "Someone's Standing on My Chest", and "Tulips Are Better", which were re-worked for the band's third release. The record also caught the attention of record executives at Victory Records, who quickly signed the band and added it to its roster.
Atreyu recorded and released its first full-length album in 2002. Suicide Notes and Butterfly Kisses would become an instant fan favorite and was noticed by a wide variety of music fans. The record broke down the walls separating the genres of heavy metal and hardcore, allowing the band to push itself into the forefront of the metal core scene. Critics from publications such as the L.A. Times, Guitar World, and Metal Maniacs commented that the "Southern California five-piece brings new definition to overnight success." Since then, the album has sold over 100,000 copies and has produced two popular singles, "Isn’t Love Grand" and "Lip Gloss and Black."
