Autism is a problem with the way the brain grows and develops. People with autism are not very good socially. Sometimes they do not like to look at others while talking to them, or do not want to share interesting things with others. Also, they are not good at communicating. Sometimes they may not talk, or want to talk with others. Last, they repeat themselves. They may be interested in one thing that people without autism would not think is that important.
Staying alone.
A normal baby without autism will usually look at people talking, look at other people's faces, smile, and be interested in other people. Autistic babies, though, may like objects more than faces and other people. They may look for a second at a face, but quickly turn. They may not smile, or may just smile at what they're interested in.
Autistic children may usually like to be by themselves, without other people around. They may not be interested in making friends. They may also not react normally to hugging and other signs of love by their parents. This does not mean that they do not love their parents, they just do not know how to say it.
They may also not see other people's feelings; for example, they might not see much difference between whether a parent is smiling or being sad. They may laugh and cry at the wrong times.
Not talking.
An autistic child might not try to talk, point, or otherwise try to get a message across by 1 year of age. Some autistic people do not speak. Many are not good at talking with other people.
Doing things over and over again.
Some autistic people spend a lot of time doing the same thing over and over again, or be interested in unusual things; some might spend a lot of time waving their arms around, walking on their toes, or putting things in order. An autistic person might spend a huge amount of time putting toys in lines or patterns and may get angry if someone bumps something out of place.
Some do not want any change, and will do exactly the same things every day without change—such as what they eat, when they eat, getting dressed, brushing their teeth, or going to school—and may even get upset if any change takes place to this. They may also be interested in strange things and may spend all of their time learning about their interest.
History.
Autism was first named in 1943. Leo Kanner did a study of 11 children and found unusual things about them. He called it "early infantile autism". Around the same time, another doctor, Hans Asperger, did another study on nearly the same thing. His discovery is now called "Asperger syndrome", while Leo Kanner's discovery is called "autistic disorder", "childhood autism", "infantile autism", or just plain "autism".
