António de Oliveira Salazar called a dictator by some people and a Statesman by others was perhaps the only politician in modern Portuguese history to stir passions years after his passing away.An academic, Dr Salazar was a Professor of Economics and perhaps the most educated and urbane European leader of the time.
Following a military revolution in 1926 which overthrew a civilian government of squabbling politicians and a country close to penury Dr. Salazar was invited to put right the finances of what was then a failed state, Dr Salazar was Finance Minister for 13 days, resigned in disgust over interfering politicians and soldiers and went back to his university. He was again persuaded to take over as Finance Minister in 1928 which he did conditionally on an assurance of greated powers for himself and minimal interference from the government. Salazar continued as minister until 1932 and was widely credited with turning the flagging economy around.
Dr Salazar was Prime Minister from 1932 until 1968.
He ruled Portugal for almost 40 years, managing to keep Portugal away from the Second World War and preventing also a Spanish invasion by keeping friends on both sides. Salazar died in 1970. Often called a fascist by his opponents, Dr Salazar's regime was instrumental in issuing Portuguese nationality documents to thousands of fleeing Jews though Europe and ultimately through Portugal a boarding point for the ultimate flight to North America.Unfortunately Dr Salazar's contribution to this humanitarian cause was never acknowledged as this activity had to be toned down & wound up in the later years of the war. Embassy staff in Europe particularly in Vichy France some say for reasons other than just humanitarian turned a limited covert operation into a massive flood, provoking a angry rumble from a powerful Germany. Ironically some such embassy officials are feted to this day as the valiant individuals who helped the desperate Jews.
A little known fact is that Salazar's Portugal was the only European nation at the time to have non white people at all levels of administration and judiciary. Dark skinned people termed "colonial subjects" in other colonial empires were accorded full civil status by Portugal. It was the only State anywhere in the western world to have non European Members of Parliament. This status was however not universally available to the Blacks of the African territories i.e. those who were not "assimilados" (literately translated to "assimilated")which meant those Africans who had not given up their tribal customs nor reached minimum educational standards.Roughly 4% of the African populace was considered "assimilado" whilst in the overseas colonies of Cape Verde,India and China 100% were considered assimilados even though in the latter two territories, people were not largely of the Roman Catholic faith nor did most speak the Portuguese language.
In the mid sixties Portugal and its colonies found themselves in the front line of the Cold war, with a proxy war which drained Portugal of its resources. Salazar was blamed for a War he had no control over and the consequent impoverishment of his country. Thousands from mainland Portugal fled into neighbouring European countries particularly France to avoid the military draft and the war in africa. Most took up menial jobs and were a convinient source of low cost labour in Europe. This expatriate segment of society got increasingly empowered after a Military coup overthrew the government of Salazar's successor Marcello Caetano in 1974. Many returned to Portugal to become next generation Politicians.
The the term "fascist regime" probably stems from a attempt by this sizable group to demonize the fallen regime and justify their flight from a country at war.
Salazar is still loved by some of the people of Portugal today, and was voted the greatest Portuguese man of all time. Apologists say that it was more as a way of showing frustration with the current political events and politicians in Portugal than actually a true devotion.A great segment of the Portuguese people though may beg to differ.
