Drinks that contain alcohol are generally known as alcoholic drink. In chemistry there is a whole class of substances known as alcohols. The alcohol used in alcoholic drinks is known as ethanol or "grain alcohol". Grain alcohol is generally made through a process called fermentation. In fermentation, bacteria change sugar to make ethanol or vinegar.
The maximum amount of alcohol by volume reachable by fermentation is at about 20%. To get higher concentrations for spirits, distillation is used. This allows to get substances that are made of alcohol to about 80-85% (Certain kinds of Rum used for cooking are at 70-80% alcohol).
Alcopops are very sweet, and usually do ont contain much alcohol (most have less than a Beer), but their sale is often restricted, because they contain distilled alcohol, like spirits. Spirits are used most often ot make mixed drinks.
Most contries limit the sale of the different kinds of alcohol. Usually there are two limits, one for wines and beers, and the other for spirits. Alcoholic drinks can be dangerous (they can interfere with the development of children and teenagers).
In an everyday setting, the word alcohol is often used to refer to one type of alcohol called ethanol (also called grain alcohol), which is a type of alcohol that people drink. Sometimes the term is used to mean any drink containing ethanol, such as whisky, vodka, or gin.
Ethanol is a colorless liquid which turns to vapor very fast, and has a strong smell. Ethanol is created by the fermentation of sugars.
Drinking ethanol causes a person to feel relaxed. Ethanol is very commonly used, and has been made by humans for thousands of years. It is one of the oldest and most used re-creational drug (drugs used for fun) in the world. People may overuse it for the same reason; this results in alcoholism (addiction to alcohol). If a person drinks a lot of alcohol, they become intoxicated, meaning that they get drunk. People will do strange things and cannot control themselves when they are drunk. All alcohols are toxic, but ethanol is less toxic because the human body can break it down quickly.
