Ancient Greek boxing is a very old kind of sport. It has been practiced at least since the eighth century BC. r wrote about it in his poem "Iliad". At that time, Greece was made of many city-states that were independent. Each city state seems to have had its own version of the sport.
Today, most of the sources that talk about Greek boxing are either legends, or they are fragmentary. When a source is fragmentary, this means that part of the text has been lost, or is missing. This makes it difficult to find the rules, or where and how the activity was done. Several details are missing, but it seems boxing with gloves was an important part of the Greek athletic culture of the time.
Where it came from.
The activity was called "pyx" or "pygme" in Ancient Greek. Archeologists have found evidence that this activity was probably done by the Minoan and Myceanean cultures. Many legends tell about the origins of boxing in Greece. One legend says that the heroic ruler Theseus invented a type of boxing where two men sat face to face and beat each other with their fists until one of them was killed. Later, the boxers began to fight while standing. They also started to wear gloves (with spikes) and wrappings on their arms below the elbows. In Ancient Greece, most sports were done naked, boxing too.
According to "Iliad", Mycenaean warriors included boxing in their competitions. They did this to honor those who had died. It is possible that Homer told about what the Greeks did, at a later time. Boxing was one of the contests held in memory of Achilles' friend Patroclus, who was killed toward the end of the Trojan War. To commemorate Patroclus the Greeks later introduced boxing ("pygme / pygmachia") to the Olympic Games in 688 BC. People taking part trained on punching bags (called a "korykos"). Fighters wore leather straps (called "himantes") over their hands, wrists, and sometimes chest, to protect themselves from injury. The straps also left the fingers free.
Philostratus was a scholar and an historian. According to him, boxing was originally developed in Sparta, in order to harden warriors’ faces for battle. The early Spartans believed helmets were unnecessary and boxing prepared them for when they were hit on the head in battle. However, Spartans never took part in the competitive version of boxing. They thought it was dishonorable to be defeated that way.
Equipment.
Until around 500 BC "himantes" were used as protection for the knuckles and hand. They were thongs of ox hide between 3 and 3.7 meters long. The "himantes" were wrapped around the hands and knuckles many times.
Around 400 BC "sphairai" were introduced. The "sphairai" were very similar to "himantes". The biggest difference was that the inside was padded when they were wrapped around the hands. The outside of the thong was more rigid too.
Soon after the "saphirai" had been introduced, they were replaced by "oxys" used for boxing. "Oxys" were made of several thick leather bands that were wrapped around the hand, wrist, and forearm. A band of fleece was placed on the forearm to wipe away sweat. Leather braces extended up the forearm to give greater support when punching. The knuckles were reinforced with leather as well.
"Korykos" were the equivalent to modern punching bags. They were used for practice in the Palaestra and were filled with sand, flour, or millet.
