Allentown is a city located in Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, in the United States. After Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, it is Pennsylvania's third most populous city. As of the 2000 census, the city had a total population of 106,632. It is the county seat of Lehigh County.
The town is in northeast Pennsylvania about 45 minutes away from the Pocono Mountains.
Founding.
The city of Allentown was first settled in 1735. It was then named a Northampton town (Northampton-Towne) in 1762 by William Allen, a rich shipping merchant, Chief Justice of the Province of Pennsylvania and former mayor of Philadelphia. The property on which the town was created was part of a 5,000-acre area Allen bought in 1735 from the sons of William Penn. Allen hoped that Northampton-Towne would become a commercial center because of its location by the Lehigh River and how close it was to Philadelphia. Allen gave the property to his son, James, who built a summer home, Trout Hall, there in 1770.
On March 18 1811, the town was formally created as a borough. On March 6 1812, Lehigh County was formed from the western half of Northampton County, and Northampton was made the county seat. The town was officially renamed "Allentown" on April 16 1833 because the name was so popular. Allentown was formally made a city on March 12 1867.
Liberty Bell.
The Liberty Bell was successfully hidden from the British during the American Revolutionary War in Allentown. After George Washington was defeated at the Battle of Brandywine on September 11, 1777, the revolutionary capital of Philadelphia was defenseless, and prepared for the British to attack. The Supreme Executive Council of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania said that eleven bells, like the State House bell and the bells from Philadelphia's Christ Church and St. Peter's Church, should be taken down and removed from the city to stop the British, who would melt the bells down to and make into cannons, from taking the bells. The bells were moved north to Northampton-Towne, and hidden in the basement of the Old Zion Reformed Church, in what is now center of Allentown. Today, a shrine in the church's basement marks the same spot where the Liberty Bell was hidden.
Birthplace of the American Industrial Revolution.
Before the 1830s, Allentown was a small town with only local markets. When the Lehigh Canal was created the economy soon grew. The town changed with industrialization and became one of the United States' largest areas for heavy industry and manufacturing. While Allentown was not as large as Bethlehem, the city right next to it, the local iron industry still brought many jobs to the city. Railroads, like the Lehigh Valley Railroad, were very important to move raw materials and finished goods, and created many new jobs.
Allentown also had a strong tradition in the making of beer and was home to many famous breweries, like the Horlacher Brewery (founded 1897, closed 1978).
Early 20th century to present.
Economic recovery in the early 20th century was caused by the silk and textile industry. The Adelaide Silk Mill, which was one of the largest mills in the world, opened in Allentown in 1881. By 1928, there more than 140 silk and textile mills in the Lehigh Valley which made silk the second largest industry. By the 1930s, the silk industry was in worldwide was slowing down because synthetics were taking the place of silk. Catoir Silk Mill, the last silk mill in Allentown, closed in 1989. In 1905, Mack Trucks moved to Macungie, a small suburb of Allentown, which began Allentown's focus on heavy industrial manufacturing. Today, Allentown's economy is mostly service industries.
Climate.
Allentown's climate is called humid continental. Summers are hot and muggy, fall and spring are mild, and winter is cold. Precipitation is almost uniformly distributed throughout the year. Allentown's weather is affected by the Blue Mountain, a mountain ridge from 1,000 to 1,600 feet in height about 12 miles north of the city, and South Mountain, a mountain ridge of 500 to 1,000 feet in height that borders the city on the south.
