Asperger Syndrome affects the way in which a person understands other people, talks with other people, and acts with other people. A person who has "Asperger Syndrome" often seems to be rather odd, and may not fit in well with other people. Asperger Syndrome is called a developmental disorder, not a mental illness. Most adults with Asperger Syndrome can learn how to make friends, do useful work and live successful lives. Asperger syndrome is considered to be at the highest functioning end of the Autistic spectrum disorders.
Causes and treatment.
Asperger Syndrome begins in childhood. No one knows exactly what causes Asperger Syndrome. Part of the brain which controls a person's "social behavior" (fitting in well with other people) may grow or function differently in a person with Asperger Syndrome. This part of the brain also controls some body movement such as balance. A person with Asperger syndrome may walk or act in a clumsy way and have trouble doing body actions such as sports. They may also have nervous habits called "tics", which cause them to do sudden movements like twitching, sniffing or flapping their hands. Asperger Syndrome seems to run in families. Parents who have Asperger Syndrome often have children with it, and also children who have autism.
Asperger Syndrome cannot be found by testing blood or looking at someone's body. A medical doctor needs to talk with the person and other people who know him or her well, to watch how the person moves and behaves, and to learn about the person's past. Sometimes a doctor believes by mistake that the person has schizophrenia, ADHD or mental retardation instead. Tourette syndrome with "tics" often comes with Asperger Syndrome.
Most people who have Asperger Syndrome have normal or high intelligence. As children, they may need special help at home and school to learn social behavior. Asperger Syndrome cannot be made better by taking medicine. (People who have Asperger Syndrome are sometimes given medicine to help them if they get depressed. Depression is often a problem for people with Asperger Syndrome.)
People with Asperger Syndrome can have a hard time "fitting in" with other people. Adults with Asperger Syndrome usually learn enough "coping skills" to act in a way that seems normal, but often with a few differences. Most people with the syndrome can communicate clearly with friends and family. They may have more difficulty in communicating with new people.
Signs and symptoms.
A "syndrome" is a recognized pattern of signs and symptoms. Here is a list of symptoms of Asperger Syndrome. Not every person with Asperger Syndrome has every symptom.
Effects of difficulties in communication.
When people talk to each other, they use spoken words to communicate. They also use the sound of their voice and "non-verbal communication" such as facial expression and "body language" to give meaning to what they say. So while people are talking, they are also looking for signs in the other person's face and the movement of their body to tell how they are feeling and whether they mean exactly the same as their words are saying.
Asperger Syndrome is sometimes called "other planet" syndrome because people with Asperger Syndrome often feel that they are quite normal but are living in a world full of aliens.
History.
In the 1940s, a doctor named Hans Asperger studied some children that were different from most other children that he knew, but were like each other. He called them "little professors" because he thought that they were clever and wrote a book about them.
In the 1980s Dr. Lorna Wing made up the name "Asperger Syndrome" for people with high-functioning autism after research into Hans Asperger's work.
In 1994 Asperger Syndrome was added to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV).
Dr. Tony Attwood, Dr. Simon Baron-Cohen and Dr. Uta Frith are three of the current leading authorities on Asperger Syndrome.
