Ancient Egypt was a society that lasted for a long time many years ago. It grew along the Nile river and was its most powerful in the second millennium BC. When it was its biggest, it went all the way from the Nile delta to a mountain called Jebel Barkal in Sudan.
Ancient Egypt was created at least 5,500 years ago. It started around 3500 BC and ended at about 30 BC when the country was invaded by the Roman Empire.
The society of ancient Egypt depended on a balance of natural and human resources, especially the irrigation of the Nile Valley so that the Egyptians could have good crops. It is also known for creating a way of writing called hieroglyphs, making big temples and tombs, trading with other areas, and its military. The rulers of ancient Egypt helped all of these things by keeping their people happy with religion that made them respect the rulers and their past.
History.
Archaeologists, or people who dig in the earth to find ancient objects, have found that Egypt was created a very, very long time ago. Because the Nile creates very good soil, the first Egyptians were hunter-gatherers who moved around a lot but stayed around the Nile. The archaeologists have found all sorts of tools and rock carvings from these people.
By the 10th millennium BC, the people in Egypt had created agriculture. They were growing cereal grains like wheat and barley, and because they were farming, they stayed in one place. They were bad about how they used their land though, so they used all the healthy land and made it unhealthy. Because of this, they had to move again, so they were nomads again before finding another healthy place on the Nile and setting up a new society. By the 7th millennium BC, they were farmers again and were settled in the East Sahara Desert.
By 6000 BC, there were a lot of farms and lots more construction. They learned how to domesticate (train) animals. This period of time is called the Predynastic Period because there was no person ruling all of Egypt.
Between 5500 and 3100 BC, many small cities appeared on the Nile. As more cities appeared, they needed someone to run everything, so rulers came to power. Because Egypt was so big, two different kingdoms were created: Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt. The line between the two was around the modern city of Cairo in today's Egypt. The real history of Ancient Egypt starts when the two kingdoms came together around 3000 BC under a ruler named Menes. Menes was the first pharaoh of Egypt, and he made Egypt a very safe and happy place.
Ethnicity.
People have a lot of different ideas about where the first Egyptians came from. Scientists think that the Egyptians came from Africa and the Middle East. Some archaeologists have looked at the teeth of ancient Egyptians and think they might have come from Southwest Asia. Others who have examined their skulls say their shape is similar to those from northern Sudan. The man who translated the Rosetta Stone, which told us how the Egyptians wrote, thought that the people were black, like today's Africans, but no one really knows for sure.
Government.
Ancient Egypt was split up into many different districts called "sepats". The first divisions were created during the Predynastic Period, but then, they were small city-states that ruled themselves. When the first pharaoh came to power, the sepats remained and were much like the counties in today's England. They stayed basically the same for a very long time--there were 42 of them, and each was ruled by a governor called a nomarch. This person was put in power by the pharaoh.
Ancient Egypt had a lot of different taxes, but there was no real money, so people paid each other with goods or work. The person who watched the tax collection was called the "vizier", and every tax collector in Egypt had to tell him every day how many taxes they had collected. Each person paid different taxes based on the work that they did: craftsmen paid in goods, hunters and fishermen paid with food, and every single household in the country had to pay a labour tax every year by helping with work for the country like mining or for canals. A lot of rich Egyptians paid poorer people to do this for them.
Writing.
Egyptologists, or people who study Ancient Egypt, call the writing of Egypt "hieroglyphs." It is the world's earliest writing system, and is a bit like Japanese or Chinese because it started out as ideographic language, or writing made of pictures of the words. Egyptian is different from a lot of languages because it has no vowels (the letters a, e, i, o, and u)--all sounds are consonants, or letters that aren't vowels. There are 24 sounds in the language.
Religion.
Religion was very important to Ancient Egyptians. To Egyptians, all African animals were holy and were worshipped. Because of this, Egyptians domesticated, or made pets of, animals very early and took very good care of them. The centre of any Egyptian town was the temple, and this building was used for everything from town hall to an university in addition to its religious services.
Because they were so religious, Egyptians created a lot of art of their gods. This art shows all different kinds of divine, or holy, creatures including the pharaoh, who was thought to be a god.
The afterlife was also very important to Egyptians and they are known for mummifying their dead. These mummies are important to scientists today because they tell them about how the Egyptians lived.
Medicine.
Ancient Egyptians had very advanced medical knowledge for their time. They performed surgery, set broken bones, and even knew about medicines. Some medicines the Ancient Egyptians used are honey and breast milk or gazelle's milk. Not only did they have medicinal values, they also are believed to have been used to ward off evil spirits and demons. The easiest way to see how good they were at medicine is to look at mummies, because it shows that the doctors could remove organs without ruining the body. Because of this, also, we know that Egyptians knew a lot about how the human body is laid out.
Achievements.
Engineering was a very specialised art in Egypt. Engineers were able to survey, or find the area between two points, make very complicated structures called pyramids that were nearly perfect geometrically, create cement, and make large irrigation networks. There is even the belief that Ancient Egyptians created a kind of battery.
Science was also very important. Some believe that the beginning of the modern scientific method can be found in Egypt. Mathematics were also in use in Egypt, and the golden ratio was even used in the construction of the pyramids.
Another famous ability of the Egyptians was glassmaking. Archaeologists have found many pieces of beads, jars, figures and ornaments in tombs across the nation. In 2005, there was even the discovery of an ancient glassmaking factory.
