"Angel" is a spin-off from the American television series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer". "Angel" has a darker feel than "Buffy", and at times did better in the U.S. Nielsen Ratings then "Buffy". The series was created by "Buffys creator Joss Whedon along with David Greenwalt. It first aired in October of 1999. Like "Buffy", it was produced by Whedon's production company, Mutant Enemy.
The series tells the story of the vampire Angel. Angel had his soul returned to him as punishment for killing a gypsy girl. This made him tormented by all the bad things he had done. During the first four seasons of the show, he works as a private detective in a fiction version of Los Angeles, California. There, he and a variety of others work to "help the helpless" and "save the souls" of those who had lost their way. This usually meant fighting evil demons or humans that worked with demons (the law firm Wolfram and Hart). He also had to fight his own violent nature. (Not all "demons" in the "Angel" universe are evil beings.) The fifth season saw Angel taking over as the person in charge of the law firm Wolfram and Hart. This was done to try to fight evil from the inside.
Origins.
Several years before the "Angel" first showed on television, writer Joss Whedon created the idea behind "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" to change the Hollywood formula of "the little blonde girl who goes into a dark alley and gets killed in every horror movie." Whedon was not happy with the way that the "Buffy" idea was first done in the 1992 movie, "Buffy the Vampire Slayer". He was given the chance to do the story better with the television series of the same name. The early years of the series were about the life of Buffy Summers, a High-School aged Vampire Slayer, and her group of friends in Sunnydale (a fictional small town in California). The supernatural parts in the series took the place of the real problems that are a part of adolescence and young adulthood. The character Angel, was first seen in the first episode, he became a regular cast member during the second/third seasons. In the fictional universe created by "Buffy" (the Buffyverse), Angel was born in 18th century Ireland. After being turned into a souless immortal vampire, he became very well known for the evil things he did. Over 100 years later, Angel killed a gypsy girl. Her family punished him by returning his soul. He felt a very large amount of guilt for what he had done over all those years. Angel evenutally began on a path of redemption. He hoped that he might make up for his past by doing good deeds. In the "Buffy" third season final episode, Angel leaves Sunnydale for Los Angeles to continue his path of redemption without Buffy. Whedon believed that "Angel was the one character who was bigger than life in the same way that Buffy was, a kind of superhero."
While the main idea behind "Buffy" was "High school as a horror movie" in small-town America, Greenwalt and Whedon wanted to make "Angel" into a different "gritty, urban show".
Joss Whedon and David Greenwalt created a short video, often called the "Unaired Angel pilot" for the WB Network. The idea for the series was a new version of the old detective genre.
Cancellation.
On Valentine's Day, 2004, the WB Network said that "Angel" would not be brought back for a 6th season. Joss Whedon posted a message on a popular fan site, The Bronze: Beta, in which he showed his surprise. He said he was "heartbroken". Fans created letter-writing campaigns and online petitions. They tried to get other networks, UPN mainly (the network that picked up "Buffy"), to pick up the show.
"Angels final episode, "Not Fade Away", aired on the WB May 19, 2004.
