The Alpine Newt ("Triturus alpestris") is an amphibian. It is a Salamander (Urodela or Caudata). The alpine newt is one of five newts in Germany.
Description.
Early in the year, Alpine Newts mate. During that time, the males have a blue color on their backs. Their sides have black and white stripes. Their belly has a blue stripe.
During the mating season early in the year, the males exhibit blue colouring on their backs; their flanks are stippled black and white, and on the belly are marked with a blue stripe. Their crest has yellow and black spots.
The females are more camouflaged. They are a kind of grey (sometimes brown, sometimes green), with less visible spots on the back.
The belly side of both sexes is bright orange to vermillion and always unmarked. The biggest of the males can reach up to nine, and the females up to twelve centimeters in length. After the mating season, older specimens have a darker, almost black, velvety skin (land camouflage).
Life and Habitat.
The Alpine newt typically lives in forests with good access to water in hilly to mountainous regions. They are mostly absent in forest-poor areas. They often occur in thick deciduous forests, as well as parland and natural gardens. Outside the spawning season, the Alpine Newt is a land animal. During the day it stays in all kinds of undergrowth, but during the mating season in cool water (forest pools, artificial pools). After the adults come out of winter dormancy, the Alpine Newts immediately take themselves to the spawning pools.
Location.
The spread of the alpine newt is constricted to Central Europe and parts of mountainous Southern Europe as well as an isolated area on the Iberian Peninsula.
There is also some introduced wild populations in the UK
Endangerment.
After a steep decrease in the Alpine Newt population in the 1960s-70s, they have apparently recovered their numbers a little bit. Surveillance in the surrounding area of Cologne (approximately 50m above sea level) pointed particularly toward an increase in alpine newt numbers, whereas the numbers of newts in breeding pools seemed to decline. In home gardens, newts are settling in pools in which there can be a high reproduction rate. If fish are maintained in these ponds, the population even in larger ponds will be completely wiped out. However, a small pool of 150 litres volume had more than 60 Alpine Newt larvae of different sizes contained within it at the beginning of July 2003. They were likely spawned from just one female.
Taxonomy.
The Alpine Newt has been usually placed into the "Triturus" genus. García-París et.al. split the genus Triturus into three, and placed the Alpine Newt into its own genus "Mesotriton". Also the subspecies "T. a. inexpectatus" was elevated to species status. However this split hasn't been completely accepted yet. Originally 9 subspecies of the Alpine Newt were recognized.
