Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS'") is a syndrome caused by a virus called HIV.
How many people have AIDS.
About 3,000,000 people died because of AIDS in 2004. About 500,000 of these people were children. About 40,000,000 people in the world had HIV in 2004.
Most of the people who have HIV live in Africa. Most of the children who die from AIDS live in Africa.
Many people with HIV do not know they have it. The number of people with HIV is unknown.
Where did HIV come from?
Scientists believe the first person who got HIV was a person in Africa. This happened when Simian Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV) went from chimpanzees to humans
What does HIV do in the body.
HIV attacks the immune system. This is how the body fights infections. This is also how the body helps stop cancers. So people with HIV have more infections and cancers.
HIV and AIDS.
Not every person who has HIV has AIDS. When people first get HIV they are not very sick. They can be healthy for years. When they get sick from HIV it is called AIDS.
If someone has HIV they are called "HIV positive".
CD4 T-cell count.
The blood test that defines AIDS is the CD4 T-cell count. T-cells are white blood cells. These are cells that fight infection. HIV goes into T-cells and kills them. When HIV infection gets very bad the number of CD4 T-cells in the blood goes down. CD4 is a protein outside of the T-cell. Some T-cells have this protein. They are called "CD4 positive T-cells", "CD4 T-cells" or sometimes "T4 cells".
When someone has HIV and their CD4 T-cell count (number of cells in the blood) is below 200 cells/microliter it means they have AIDS.
Treatment of HIV and AIDS.
There are medicines that help people with AIDS. These are called "antiretroviral" medicines (or "antiretrovirals".) Anti- means against. HIV is a retrovirus. So "antiretroviral" means fights retroviruses.
Antiretrovirals cannot cure AIDS. This means they cannot make all of the virus leave a persons body. But they can make people with AIDS more healthy. Antiretrovirals help people fight the HIV virus. This makes their immune systems work better. So antiretrovirals are a "treatment" but not a "cure" for HIV.
People with HIV/AIDS who take antiretroviral medicines live longer. They live more years without getting "AIDS defining illnesses". But after a long time, the HIV virus learns how to fight the antiretrovirals.The HIV viruse is not killed this medicine, it can only control it for a long period(resistant). HIV that learns this is "resistant" to the medicine. Then the "resistant" HIV hurts the immune system and the person gets AIDS.
Sometimes when HIV is resistant to one medicine, another medicine can be used. To make less resistance happen, people with AIDS take more than one medicine at the same time. They may take 2-4 medicines at once. This is sometimes called a "cocktail" or "AIDS cocktail".
When HIV gets resistant to one medicine, this is changed to another medicine. So the "AIDS cocktail" that people with AIDS take changes over time. But after a long time, the HIV learns to be resistant to "many" drugs. This is called "multi-drug-resistant" (acronym MDR) HIV. After the HIV in a person becomes MDR-HIV there may be no more medicines to treat them. So scientists keep trying to find "new" medicines to fight HIV.
What HIV/AIDS Can Do.
Eventually, HIV will turn into AIDS and damage the Immune System. AIDS can kill you if viruses attack your weak body. Even the common cold can kill someone with AIDS.
How can we stop AIDS?
There are many ways people fight the "AIDS epidemic".
Education.
The most important way to stop HIV/AIDS is education. People can get HIV from sex and from blood. Children can also get HIV from their mothers (when they grow inside pregnant mothers and when they drink breast milk.)
Sex is one way to get HIV. If people use condoms when they have sex, there is a much smaller chance of catching HIV.
You can also get HIV by "sharing needles". This means using a dirty (not clean) needle after someone else has used it. Some people who take illegal drugs like heroin and cocaine take these drugs by needle. Some of these people share needles. If one person has HIV and he shares his needles, he can give HIV to other people. But if people have clean needles or if they know how to clean needles, they do not get HIV as much.
Many people do not know that condoms and clean needles help stop HIV. They may not even "know" that sharing needles and sex with someone who has HIV can make them get HIV. Even if people know about condoms and clean needles, they may not "have" condoms and clean needles.
Safe sex and needle exchange.
There are some people who do not want people to "know" about condoms or clean needles, or do not want people to have condoms or clean needles. They believe that if people know about condoms and have condoms they will have more sex. They believe that if people have clean needles they will use illegal drugs more. Many of these people think this because of their religion. For example, the Catholic church does not want people to have or use condoms. They do not want people to have condoms because they do not think people should have sex unless they are married. They also think that married people should not use condoms, because they believe that if people have sex, it should only be to make a baby.
Scientists who study (look at and learn about) people who use condoms, see that if teenagers (children 13-19) learn about condoms (and other birth control) they have "less" unsafe sex. Scientists see that learning about these things does not make teenagers start having sex earlier. The teenagers also have "safer" sex. Safer sex means doing things (like wearing condoms) to try not to get pregnant or get sexually transmitted diseases (STDs or STIs) like HIV, gonorrhea, and syphilis. Using a condom works "very" well for keeping people from getting pregnant or getting STDs if people know how to use a condom the right way.
Scientists have also learned that if a city has a needle exchange program it will have fewer people who use illegal drugs. "Needle exchange programs" are where people can come in and trade dirty needles for clean needles. This means that "if" they use drugs they will be more safe. But needle exchange programs do more than give people clean needles. They teach people about drugs. If people want to stop using drugs, they help them.
HIV vaccine.
The best way to stop HIV is a vaccine. There is no vaccine for HIV yet. "Many" scientists are looking for an HIV vaccine. Even one that protected "some" people from HIV would save millions of people's lives.
Different ideas.
Some scientists think that HIV is not the cause of AIDS. They think AIDS is the result of illegal drug use, drugs used to treat HIV infection, malnutrition, poverty, multiple infections, and other assaults on the immune system. Most scientists disagree with this viewpoint and feel the evidence for HIV as the cause of AIDS is overwhelming. See the other websites below.
