Australian English is the kind of English language used in Australia.
History.
People from Britain and Ireland first came to live in Australia in 1788. They brought many different kinds of English with them. These different kinds of English began to mix and change. The new comers soon began to speak with their own distinctive accent and vocabulary.
More and more people came to Australia in the 19th and 20th centuries. Many people came looking for gold. Some came from Britain and Ireland. Others came from non-English speaking countries. Australian English continued to grow and change.
Australian English has also been influenced by American English. During the Second World War there were many American soldiers staying in Australia. American television shows and music have been popular in Australia since the 1950s.
Accent.
The Australian and New Zealand accents are very similar. The Australian accent is also similar to accents from the South-East of Britain.
Some Australian English vowels sound different to vowels of other kinds of English. For example, the vowel in "day" starts with a very open mouth. This makes the Australian "day" sound close to the "die" of most British or American people.
Australian English has some vowels not used in some other kinds of English. For example, the words "bad" and "lad" do not rhyme because "bad" has a long vowel and "lad" has a short one. Also, "cot" does not sound like "caught" and "bother" does not rhyme with "father".
As with American English the /t/ sound can sometimes sound like a /d/ sound. This usually happens between vowels. So, for example,
Also in the Australian accent a /t/ sound plus the sound of "you" comes out sounding like "chew" and a /d/ sound plus the sound of "you" comes out sounding like "Jew". Here are some examples of things which sound the same.
Words.
Australians use many words that other English speakers do not use. The famous Australian greeting, for example, is "G'day!". A native forest is called the "bush" and central Australia is called the "outback".
Many words were brought to Australia from Britain and Ireland. For example, "mate" meaning "friend" which is still used in Britain. Some of these words have changed in meaning.
A few words have come from Australian Aboriginal languages. These are mainly names for animals, plants and places. Some examples are "dingo" and "kangaroo".
Sometimes we do not know where a word came from. For example, "dinkum" or "fair dinkum" means "true", "is that true?", "this is the truth". But nobody know where the word is from: some say the word comes from Chinese, others say the word comes from England.
Spelling.
Australian spelling is generally very similar to British spelling. In words like "organise", "realise", both "-ise" and "-ize" are accepted, as in British English, but, "-ise" is preferred. In words like "colour", "favourite", "-our" is usual, but sometimes it is spelled with "-or". "Program" and "jail", on the other hand, are more common than "programme" and "gaol".
Kinds of Australian English.
Most linguists (scientists who study language) split Australian English up into three main kinds. These are Broad, General, and Cultivated Australian English.
Broad Australian English sounds very strongly Australian, when compared to other kinds of English. Steve Irwin and Dame Edna Everage speak Broad Australian English.
General Australian English is the middle ground. It is used by most Australians, and can be heard in Australian-made films and television programs. Russell Crowe and Nicole Kidman speak General Australian English.
Cultivated Australian English is close to British English. Judy Davis and Geoffrey Rush speak Cultivated Australian English.
The Australian accent doesn't change much across the country. However, one small difference is how the letter 'a' sounds like in the words "castle", "dance", "chance", "advance", etc. Some use the vowel in "calm" others use the vowel in "mat" or "mad".
However, there are differences in the words Australians use in different parts of the country. For example, "footy" means "rugby" in NSW and Queensland, but "Australian rules football" in Victoria. In NSW, a swimming costume is called a "cossie" or "swimmers", in Queensland it is called "togs", but it's called "bathers" in most other states.
