Abigail Powers Fillmore (March 13, 1798 - March 30, 1853), was the wife of Millard Fillmore, the President of the United States. She acted as the First Lady of the United States from 1850 to 1853.
She was born in Saratoga County, New York. Her father’s name was Lemuel Powers. Her father died shortly after her birth. After this, her mother moved away westward to less settled area. Abigail Powers had a brother also. Their mother gave them a good education with the help of her husband’s library.
When Abigail Powers was around 19 years old and a student at an academy at New Hope, New York, she met Millard Fillmore. He was also studying in the same academy. They married in February 1826. In 1828, she bore him a son. The son’s name was Millard Powers Fillmore. After few years, Fillmore bought a home in Buffalo, New York. There, she bore a daughter. The daughter’s name was Mary Abigail. During the next few years, her husband became U. S. Congressmen. Her husband became a state comptroller. In 1849, her husband became the Vice President of the United States. The couple moved to the Washington, D.C.. After 16 months, President Zachary Taylor died. Millard Fillmore became the President. The Fillmore couple started to live in the White House.
During last several years, Abigail Powers had learnt to move in the high society. She did a fine role as the First Lady.
She had a permanently injured ankle. This made standing difficult to greet guests. But, she still continued to act as the first lady. Later on, due to her bad health, she gave many routine duties of the First Lady to her daughter, "Abby."
Abigail Powers could get a special sanction of money from the government. With this, she bought many books for the library at the White House. After her husband’s retirement, she attended the inauguration of President Franklin Pierce. She returned to her hotel room. Due to very chill weather, she became sick with pneumonia. On 30th March, 1853, she died of pneumonia. In her respect, the United States Congress adjourned (that is, stopped working) for that day, and government offices remained closed. She was buried at Buffalo.
After about five years of her death, her husband married a widow named Caroline Fillmore of Buffalo, New York. Millard died on 8th March 1874.
