Amy Lynn Hartzler (née Lee; born December 13, 1981) best known as Amy Lee, is an American singer and songwriter, and the lead vocalist and co-founder of the rock band Evanescence. She is also a classically-trained pianist and she often composes the bands' music.
Lee was discovered by Ben Moody, who is the other co-founder of Evanescence, in 1994 when she performed a song in summer camp. She sometimes designs her own clothes and likes Victorian styled clothing. Lee is the spokesperson of the Epilepsy Foundation and started a campaign called "Out of the Shadows".
Lee was inspired by many artists from classical artists such as Mozart to modern artists like Björk, Tori Amos, Danny Elfman and Plumb. She is the only original band member who is still in the band. In 2008, she won the Icon Award as songwriter of the year.
Life.
Amy Lee was born in Riverside, California to John Lee and Sara Cargill. Her family moved to many places and finally setteled in Little Rock, Arkansas. She has two sisters, Carrie and Lori, and one brother, Robby. She had a third sister who died 1987. Lee wrote the songs "Hello" and "Like You" for her late sister. She is mostly of Scottish and English heritage.
Lee went to Pulaski Acadamy and graduated in 2000. She then went to Middle Tennessee State University for a short while. Amy was the president of her highschool choir. She wrote the song "Listen to the Rain" and sang it with the choir. She also took piano lessons for nine years. The first song Lee had written was when she was eleven years old, when she wanted to become a classical composer.
Lee is married to Josh Hartzler, a therapist and long time friend of Amy's. They got married on May 6, 2007.
Evanescence.
Lee met Ben Moody in a youth summer camp in 1994. She was singing a song while playing on the piano when Moody met her. The pair first started playing acoustic songs in bookstores and coffeehouses, then they made two EPs. In 2000, they made the Origin EP, which was longer than the first two.
In 2003, Evanescence released their first album, Fallen, which became very successful. The band won two Grammy Awards for "Fallen". Some songs from "Origin" were also included in the album.
Ben Moody left the band on October 22, 2003, because of "creative differences". He was replaced by Terry Balsamo, who helped write most of the songs for Evanescecne's second album, The Open Door.
Image.
Many fans admire Lee becuase she doesn't use sex appeal in her music. The song "Everybody's Fool" and its video were made to mock artists who use sex appeal.
Style and fashion.
In public events, Lee often wears Victorian styled clothes. Some of her clothes are inspired by Gothic fashion. She sometimes designs her outfits, like the red dress in the music video for "Going Under". She chose Japanese designer H. Naoto to make her clothes after she designed them. Lee used to have a piercing on her left eyebrow, which can be clearly seen on the cover of "Fallen".
Lee mentioned in an interview with AOL that her image is different from when she is on stage and explained that what she wears on stage is to complete the image.
Voice.
Lee is known for her usage of choir like notes, especially in "The Open Door". Lee is classified as a mezzo-soprano, with a vocal range of three octaves. Her highest recorded note on Evanescence albums is a C#6 in the song "Weight of the World" from The Open Door.
Other Projects.
Lee worked with other artists, including David Hodgens, who used to be a member of Evanescence. The singer performed a duet with Shaun Morgan of Seether on the track "Broken (Seether song)". She also performed "Freak on a Leash" live with Korn. She also had a guest appearance in the music video for Johnny Cash's "God's Gonna Cut You Down", and chose to appear laying flowers on a grave.
Lee covered songs like Korn's "Thoughtless". She also recorded a cover of "Sally's Song" for "Nightmare Revisited".
She is the current American Chairperson for the "Out of the Shadows" foundation.
