Afghanistan (Persian: جمهوری اسلامی افغانستان) is a country located in South Asia. It is bordered by Iran in the west, Pakistan in the south and east, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan in the north, and China in the northeast..
Islam is the main religion. Persian (Dari) and Pashto are the main languages. The population of Afghanistan is divided into many ethnic groups of which Tajik, Pashtun, Hezara, Uzbek and Baloch. Although the name Afghan (in its original meaning) refers to Pashtuns only, but under the constitution of Afghanistan, the word Afghan applies to every citizen of Afghanistan. The name Afghanistan means the "Land of Afghans".
History.
The modern Afghanistan was established in 1747 and in 1919 the king of Afghanistan declared independence for the state (from UK control over Afghan foreign affairs) under the new name "Afghanistan". The history of the land does not begin in 1747. Aryan (Indo-European people) tribes settled in the area around 4000 years ago and called their land "Airiana vaejo" means the "Land of Aryans". This name was mentioned in the Avesta, the old book of their religion, Zoroastrianism. The old Greek writers heard the word and called the land of these Aryan settlers "Ariana".
By the middle of the sixth century BC, the Persians who were also Aryans included the area within its boundaries and created Persian Empire. Alexander the great conquered Persian Empire by fighting in 330 BC. After him Kushans, Parthians and Sassanians took over. The Sassanians who were also Persians called their empire "Eranshahr" which later became Iran means the "Land of Aryans". Iran used to be called Persia for a long time by people outside of Iran.
Other people took Iran by fighting like the Arabs (7th century), Turks (10th century) and Mongols (13th century). The area which is now known as Afghanistan was then called "Khorasan" and it was a prosperous and important province of Iran, as it was the seat of most rulers.
The Safavid dynasty (1502-1736) made Shia Islam the religion of their state. Safavids were cruel to Afghans (Pashtuns) who were living in the south eastern parts of Khorasan and their religion was different, it was Sunni Islam. Afghans then revolted and separated Khorasan from Iran in 1747.
The country served as a buffer between the British and Russian empires until it won independence from British control in 1919.
Wars in Afghanistan.
In 1979 Soviet Union attacked and occupied Afghanistan. The occupation resulted in the killings of at least 600,000 to 2 million Afghan civilians and many more refugees. After the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989, a series of civil wars continued.
In 1996, Afghanistan was seized by a hardline movement called the Taliban. Taliban were emerged in 1994 and were sponsored by Pakistan. During the Taliban's rule, much of the Afghans experienced restrictions on their freedom and violations of their human rights. The civil wars and Taliban rule left Afghanistan in ruins.
Following the September 11 attacks, the United States overthrew the Taliban government for refusing to hand over Osama bin Laden and several al-Qaida members, who were behind these attacks.
In December 2004, Hamid Karzai became the first democratically elected president of Afghanistan.
