Alesha Anjanette Dixon was born on 7 October 1978, in Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, England to an English mother and African father. She was a former member of UK girl band, Mis-Teeq. She is expected to have her solo debut album released, titled "Fired Up", on 6 November 2006.
Mis-Teeq.
Dixon's career began in 1999 when she met Sabrina Washington when they both joined "Dance Attic" (a popular dance class school in West London), and together they formed a duo and recorded a demo titled "Inspiration". During an audition, they met with Su-Elise Nash, and then together they formed a trio. They were soon signed to Telstar Records with the addition of a new member, Zena McNally, and became the popular Garage/R&B girl band, Mis-Teeq. They released their debut single "Why?" in 2000, and it was not long before founding member McNally left the band to pursue her own solo career. The band made a decision to remain a trio.
In 2001, they released their debut album "Lickin' On Both Sides", featuring hits "All I Want", "One Night Stand", "B With Me" and "Roll On / This Is How We Do It". In 2003, they released their second album "Eye Candy", featuring hits "Scandalous", "Can't Get It Back" and "Style". In 2004, Mis-Teeq toured the United States and released their debut single "Scandalous" from their American debut album "Mis-Teeq", a compilation of the albums "Lickin' On Both Sides" and "Eye Candy". They also released "One Night Stand" before coming back to Europe to start work with their third album. However, Telstar Records was shut down and the band was left with no choice but to have released a 'Greatest Hits' compilation right under exclusive licenses with Universal Recording Company.
Dixon appeared in the N*E*R*D* music video for "She Wants to Move", from their second album "Fly Or Die". The last song she recorded with her band was "Shoo Shoo Baby" for the Disney film "Valiant". In March 2005, they released their 'Greatest Hits' compilation and announced that they were separating each to pursue a solo career. Dixon later announced that she was signed with a ₤500,000 contract deal with Polydor Records and announced that she will work on material for her solo debut album. In summer of 2005, she married her long-time fiancé, rapper MC Harvey (formerly of So Solid Crew).
Solo career.
Dixon has spent an entire year preparing for her solo debut album, "Fired Up". In June 2005, she announced her single to be "Superficial", but the song leaked on illegally file sharing and the company stated her next single to be "Lipstick". She released her official first debut single "Lipstick" on 14 August 2006 and it went to #13 on the UK Single Charts. Dixon announced that she has worked with a wide arrangement of producers for her solo debut album, including Richard X, Xenomania, Johnny Douglas, Brian Higgins, and Paul Eppe. She has even worked on a song with famous UK rapper Estelle.
Dixon announced that her second single will be "Knock Down" a song she describes as a 'reggae-influenced' tune. The single is to be released on 30 October 2006. An album promo of "Fired Up" was released during the early weeks of September, it contained the tracks: "Lipstick", "Knock Down", "Ting-A-Ling", "Fired Up", and "Free", all which are expected to be on her debut album.
