Athens is the capital city of Greece. It is one of the most famous cities in the world. The city is named after Athena. She is the goddess of wisdom and war in Greek mythology. Athens has a population of over three million people and is growing. It is in the prefecture, or division of the country, of Attica.
History of Athens.
It is known that there were settlements in Attica region since prehistoric times. It is unknown, however, when exactly one of them called for first time "Athens". According to Plato (in Timeos dialogue), when Solon visited Egypt, some priests told him that according to their archives there was a city called Athens at least from 9600 BC). Of course taht xannot been proven if it's so, yet.
According to greek mythology the name "Athens" have given in the time of its first king Cecrops, about 2000 BC.
Later, the myth o Theseas shows that the city was a vassal of Minoic Crete until a rxpedition that overthrowrd that status-quo.
According to Homer's Iliad Athens took the side of Mykenae in Troic War, senting 50 ships (that means 1650 - 2750 men) under the command of its king Menestheas. That shows that it was already a relatively major city of Grrece, since a few other cities sent more.
Athens was a powerful city in Classical times. It was known for the amount of learning that happened there. The city was home to Plato's Academy and Aristotle's Lyceum. It also had its own Constitution. Athens also created the world's first known democracy.
The city started to decline in 529, when the Emperor Justinian I closed its philosophical schools. Parthenon had made in Cristian Church. That act saved it later from destraction of non Christian temoples, in times of deep Theocracy.
The Ottoman Turks took control of Athens in 1458. The Turks made the Parthenon into a Muslim mosque. The Parthenon was later damaged in 1687 when gunpowder exploded inside it.
Athens was freed from the Turks during the Greek war of independence (1821-1833). It was then made into the capital of Greece.
Sister cities.
Athens has these sister cities:Athens is a city.
