"Anastasia" is a movie made in 1956 by 20th Century Fox. It was based on something that happened in real life (a historical drama movie).
The movie was directed by in Anatole Litvak. The most important actors are Ingrid Bergman, Yul Brynner, and Helen Hayes. Other players include Akim Tamiroff (who earlier worked with Ingrid Bergman in the movie "For Whom the Bell Tolls"), Martita Hunt (who has a comic part as a fussy lady-in-waiting), and, in a small role, Natalie Schafer (familiar to television audiences from her later role on "Gilligan's Island").
What actually happened.
The real Anastasia was Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia. She was one of the daughter's of the Tsar, the emperor who ruled Russia. In 1918 all the Tsar's family was murdered because the Communists wanted to rule instead of the tsars. Some years later there were some people who started to believe that Anastasia had not been murdered, but had escaped and was still alive. This gave several women the idea that they would pretend to the world that they were Anastasia. The movie is about one of these women.
The movie.
The movie tells the story of a young, confused woman in 1920s France. This part is played by (Ingrid Bergman). She is found by a group of Russian people who have left their country. They want her to pretend to the world that she is Anastasia. They reason they want to do this is because they want to get money. The real Anastasia, if she were alive, would inherit millions of pounds which had been left in an English bank by the Tsar.
The Russians, led by General Bounine played by (Yul Brynner), make her learn how to behave like the Grand Duchess Anastasia. They teach her all the things she ought to know about her childhood. They teach her to walk like a Duchess, practising with a book on her head. When they think she is ready she is introduced to several people who knew Anastasia. None of them believe she really is Anastasia. The real test comes when she is taken by General Bounine (Brynner) to Denmark to meet the Dowager Empress, Maria Feodorovna played by Helen Hayes. At first the old Empress does not believe she is her granddaughter, but when Anastasia coughs because she is nervous, the Empress remembers that Anastasia used to do this as a child. She now believes she is her granddaughter. Meanwhile Prince Paul wants to marry Anastasia. He is obviously wanting to have the money he thinks she will inherit. In the final scene there is a party. The Dowager Empress is going to announce the engagement between Paul and Anastasia, but Anastasia and General Bounine have suddenly disappeared. The Dowager realizes that it was not Anastasia after all. She says very bravely that she will go in to where all the guests are waiting and tell them that the party is over and that they should go home.
