In mammals, an abortion is when a pregnancy ends early without the birth of offspring. This is usually called a miscarriage. Abortions occur spontaneously, usually because something went wrong with the pregnancy. Humans also have the possiblity to end the pregnancy before the child is born. A human child takes about 38 weeks to grow and be born. Normally, this occurs about 40 weeks after the mother's last menstruation.
Types of abortions.
There are two kinds (or types) of abortion. Sometimes, things go wrong during a pregnancy. These things may lead to the death of the unborn child. Depending on when the unborn child dies, such abortions are called "miscarriage" or "stillbirth".
In some cases finishing the pregnancy might be very dangerous to the pregnant woman. Bearing a child might also be very difficult for her. In such cases, things can be done to end the pregnancy. This is called an "induced abortion".
The unborn child is called embryo for the first eight weeks of the pregnancy, and fetus for the remaining 32 weeks.
In both types of abortion, the unborn child is usually expelled from the womb (a "complete" abortion). In some cases, the it remains inside the womb (a "missed" abortion) and surgery is required to remove it.
Names.
People speak of "sponaneous abortion" or "miscarriage" when an embryo or fetus is lost due to natural causes before the 20th week of pregnancy. A pregnancy that ends this way, but that is between 20 and 37 weeks old is known as "premature birth" if the baby is born alive. If the fetus dies in the womb after 20 weeks, or while it is born, this is known as "stillbirth". Premature births and stillbirths are generally not considered to be miscarriages.
How common they are.
Spontaneous abortions (miscarriages) are common. About 15% of pregnancies end in spontaneous abortion. In many cases, the woman is not even aware she was pregnant. The pregnancy is only a few days or weeks old and the woman believes the miscarriage is just her menses. About 25% percent of all women will have a spontaneous abortion during their lives.
Most miscarriages occur very early. Between 10% and 50% of pregnancies end with a miscarriage,
where the mother or the doctors are aware of it. These figures depend on the age and health of the pregnant woman. Most spontaneous abortions occur so early in the pregnancy that the woman is not even aware that she was pregnant. One particular study showed a rate of pregnancy in exposed ovulatory cycles of 59.6%; with 61.9% of conceptuses lost before 12 weeks. 91.7% of these occuried subclinically, without the knowledge of the mother.
The risk of spontaneous abortion decreases sharply after the 10th week of pregnancy, with a loss rate between 8.5 weeks LMP and birth of about two percent; pregnancy loss is “virtually complete by the end of the embryonic period."
Some people are more likely to have a spontaneous abortion.
Those people who have already had several spontaneous or induced abortions run a greater risk of having a spontaneous one. Those with certain diseases, and those over the age 35 also run a greater risk. Other causes for abortions can be the infection of either the woman or unborn baby or their immune response. Certain diseases or an accidental trauma can also cause a spontaneous abortion. Putting the woman under trauma or stress to cause miscarriage is considered induced abortion. Some countries call this feticide.
Cause of spontaneous abortions.
Most miscarriages are due to problems with the copying of chromosomes, but some are caused by environmental factors. When a baby is made, it gets 23 chromosomes from its mother and 23 from its father. If it does not get the right number its development happens wrong (it does not grow right.) It may have many bad birth defects (diseases a baby is born with.)
Most babies with chromosome problems will not live for a long time. They die very early. There are a few chromosome problems that babies can sometimes be born with. For example, Down Syndrome happens when a baby has three chromosome #21. (Usually people have 2 of every chromosome.) This is called "trisomy 21" (tri- means 3.)
Symptoms of spontaneous abortions.
The most common symptom is bleeding from the vagina. This can be very little blood (less blood than a normal menses.) It can be very much blood (much more than a normal menses.)
Some women have bad pains in their low abdomen when they have a miscarriage. This is sometimes like the pain of menses. It can be much worse. Or a woman may have no pain at all. If the pregnancy is many weeks old, the woman may see the fetus when it comes out. But if it is less than 12 weeks old a woman may not see anything but blood.
Treatment of spontaneous abortions.
Sometimes no treatment is needed. Sometimes doctors do a surgical abortion. This is the same kind of surgery that is done for induced abortions. Sometimes doctors give women medicines to help the miscarriage finish without needing surgery.
Induced abortions.
Induced abortions are done by doctors. In those countries where abortion can be done legally, it is often done by specialists who know a lot about the female organism. Abortions done illegally are often performed by people without this special knowledge. This makes them more dangerous.
Kinds of induced abortions.
Surgical induced abortions are where the unborn child is taken out by a physical act. The kind of surgical abortion done depends on how long the pregnancy has gone on. It is easier in earlier stages of the pregnany. There are less problems that can occur. So it is best to do a surgical abortion as early as possible.
Chemical abortions are where a doctor gives a woman a medicine to end the pregnancy. There are two medicines used for this. The medicines are mifepristone (RU-486) and methotrexate. These two medicines both kill the fetus. Then the abortion happens like a "spontaneous" abortion.
Controversy about induced abortions.
A controversy is when people do not agree on something. Induced abortion is very controversial. Some people think a woman should be able to have an induced abortion if she decides that she does not want to complete her pregnancy for whatever reason. Some people think a woman should only be able to have an induced abortion if she will get very ill if she stays pregnant. (Some women have diseases that make pregnancy very dangerous, and there are rare cases of women who might die if the baby is allowed to grow and be born.) Some people think women should never be able to kill the fetus by having an abortion.
People think these different things because of morals (things people believe about what is right and wrong to do) and human rights. People also think these things because of their religion. Some religions say induced abortions are very bad because they kill a tiny innocent human person. Others think that an induced abortion, while not right, is still something a woman should be able to choose in order to control her life.
People who think a woman should be able to have an induced abortion sometimes say they are "Pro-Choice" (they think a woman should have the right to "choose").
People who think the unborn baby is a person and has the right to stay alive and not be killed by abortion say they are "Pro-Life" (they think an unborn child has the human right to life).
Some people feel very strongly about abortion. A very small number of people have attacked or bombed the "clinics" (places where doctors and nurses work) and killed people who work in these places. They have done this because they view a fetus or embryo the same as a baby. They think that when a doctor performs an abortion he is killing a baby, so they kill the doctor to prevent him from killing any more babies. For example, in 1998 James Kopp shot abortion Dr. Barnett Slepian to death.
The American Medical Association approves of abortion and some people share this opinion. They think that the embryo or fetus is a part of the woman's body and is not a human person. They think a woman can kill the unborn fetus in order to control her body.
The American College of Pro-Life Physisicans considers the embryo or fetus to be a human person who deserves respect and medical care. Some people agree, and are against abortion because they feel the unborn baby has a right to live, and the woman's right to control her body is not so important that she can decide to kill the unborn fetus.
Physical problems.
Abortion is safer than childbirth, if it is done before the 16th week of pregnancy and a professional does the abortion. Certain Abortion methods are pretty safe, and complications are rare. Generally, stopping a pregnancy that has gone on longer is riskier.
Women typically feel a small amount of pain during first-trimester abortion procedures. In a 1979 study of 2,299 patients, 97% reported experiencing some degree of pain. Patients rated the pain as being less than earache or toothache, but more than headache or backache.
Local and general anesthesias are used during the procedure
Psychological problems.
Few studies have been done to see if an abortion affects the woman psychically. Those that have been done give contradictory results. One study looked at 13.000 women who had become pregnant even though they did not want to. The study found that having an induced abortion does not increase the risk of getting pyschical problems; the group that was compared were women who also did not want to have a baby, but who did not have an abortion. Other studies showed similar results: women who had an abortion did better in school or at work after the abortion. Another study showed that women who had an abortion had a higher self-esteem and felt better than those who did not.
Many women who had an abortion felt better afterwards, they also felt relieved. They would do it again in a similar situation.
A study done in New Zealand in 2006 showed that many women who had an abortion develeoped severe depressions up to 4 years after they had the abortion. They were also more likely have problems with alcohol and illegal drugs that those women who did not have an abortion. The person who oversaw the study later told media that given these results it would be very hard to say that having an abortion has no psychological effects on the womam who has is. He called the abortion "a traumatic experience"
Other problems.
Both spontaneous and induced abortions have some risk for the woman. (Risk means chance that a bad thing may happen.)
If a bad thing happens because of a surgery or medicine that a doctor gives, or because of a miscarriage, it is called a "complication". Complications of abortions can be infection, bleeding, pain. There may or may not be problems getting pregnant again; this is still being researched. In places where induced abortions are legal less than 1% of induced abortions have a bad complication. If doctors do induced abortions, the risk to the woman is less than the risk of complications of childbirth (having the baby). In places where induced abortions are legal, less women have complications of induced abortion than in places where induced abortion is illegal. This is because induced abortions that are not done by doctors have much more risks. For example, after induced abortions became legal in the United Stated in 1973, less women died from having abortions. In the United States in 2000, 11 women died from the complications of legal abortion. The risk of death from a legal abortion is 1/100 of the risk of an appendectomy. The risk of death from an injection (shot) of penicillin (an antibiotic) is bigger than the risk of death from a legal abortion.
There can be emotional problems for the woman after a spontaneous or induced abortion. She may feel sad, angry, or guilty that she had a miscarriage or asked for an abortion. She may think she has done something wrong that made the miscarriage happen or ended the life of the fetus, or she may feel intense grief at the loss of her pregnancy or child There are many places where women can get help dealing with these feelings.
Some women who have induced abortions may get criticism from friends or family who have different beliefs. When scientists look at this in research studies, however, they do not usually see that women have emotional problems after induced abortions. In 1987, President Ronald Reagan told the Surgeon General of the US to look at this question. Both president Reagan and the Surgeon General C. Everett Koop did not think abortion was right. Dr Koop looked at 250 papers that scientists wrote in scientific journals. Dr Koop said that the science we know does not show that induced abortions cause emotional problems for women who have them.
Abortion and the law.
Induced abortion is not legal in every place. In some countries, a doctor who does an induced abortion is doing a "crime". In the United States, Canada, and many countries in Europe abortion is legal (not a crime). In some countries like Ireland and Somalia it is legal only to save the life of the woman. If a woman is raped in Ireland and becomes pregnant, she cannot get an induced abortion. She must have the baby of the man who raped her. (Rape is when a person is forced to have sex.) In some countries like Chile and El Salvador it is never legal. Even if a woman will die if she keeps a pregnancy, she cannot have an induced abortion.
In countries where induced abortion is not legal many more women die from abortion. Women still get induced abortions, but they cannot get them in safe hospitals and clinics. These induced abortions have more complications than abortions done by doctors.
