Anime is Japanese for "Animation" Outside of Japan, "anime" means japanese animation.It was made in Japan", But, in Japan, anime means all animation in general. This article is about Japanese animation.
Some anime is drawn by hand, but anime can also be made with computers. Anime has most genres of fiction -- action, love stories, detective stories, and sports. these are just some examples. Anime is shown on television, on DVD and VHS, and is used in computer and video games. Also, some anime are full length movies. Anime is often based on Japanese comics (manga) and graphic novels. Sometimes live action (not animation) movies and television series use storylines from anime.
The history of anime begins around 1900, when Japanese filmmakers tried ways of animation that came from France, Germany, United States and Russia.
The filmmakers in Japan had little money, few production sites, and casting restrictions. The lack of Western-looking actors, for example, made it very hard to make movies set in Europe or America. The freedom of animation allowed artists to create characters and settings that did not look Japanese at all. This advantage made anime popular for moviemakers.
During the 1970s, there was a great increase in the popularity of manga. Anime were often created from the manga. At that time Osamu Tezuka became very popular. Now he is called a "legend" and the "god of manga". Anime developed its typical characteristics and genres through his work and that of other pioneers. The giant robot genre (known as "mecha" outside Japan) took shape under Tezuka. Robot anime like Gundam and Macross became classics in the 80s. Today, the robot genre is still very popular in Japan and worldwide. In the 1980s, anime became very popular in Japan, and saw an increase in production. (Manga is much more popular than anime in Japan).
Topics.
Many other countries in anime, besides Japan, became popular after the late 1980s. In the United States giant robot anime became popular. In Europe anime for children became popular. Today, many different kinds of anime are popular all around the world.
