The Central Bearded Dragon is the common name for the species "Pogona vitticeps", a type of lizard that lives in dry areas of Australia.
Description.
Central bearded dragons can grow to be about 2 feet long. Half of the length of a Bearded Dragon's body is its tail. Females are usually smaller than males. Bearded dragons come in many colors, like brown, grey, reddish-brown, green, and even orange. They sometimes change color a little bit when it gets hot or cold. They have special scales that look like spikes on the sides of their body, throats, necks, and heads. These spines look a little like a beard, and that is where a bearded dragon gets its name. If a bearded dragon is scared, it will flatten its body against the ground, puff out its spiny throat, and open its jaws to make itself look larger. Bearded dragons sometimes open their mouths wide to allow hot air to warm them better when they are lying in the sun.
Habitat and Behavior.
In the wild, the central bearded dragon lives in dry, hot forests and deserts in Central Australia. They can climb very well, and spend a lot of time on top of tree branches, fenceposts, and bushes. They are cold blooded, and need the sun to keep their bodies warm, so they spend the mornings and evenings out in the sun. During the hottest part of the day and during the night they hide underground.
Bearded dragons do not make sounds usually, but when they are scared they might hiss like a cat. They move their bodies and change color to talk to each other. Sometimes, young bearded dragons will wave their arms to greet adults. A dominant bearded dragon will take the highest spot to rest, and will climb over others to get there. Bearded dragons also bob their heads up and down to communicate.
When a female bearded dragon is ready to lay eggs she will not eat very much and will spend most of her time trying to dig.
Diet.
Central bearded dragons are omnivores. They eat small and large insects and sometimes even eat small mammals like mice. They also eat soft plants like leaves fruits, vegetables, and flowers. They get most of their water from the food they eat, but they need to drink sometimes too.
