The Bundesverfassungsgericht is the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany. It does not hear ordinary criminal cases. Instead it deals with matters that affect the Constitution of Germany.
The Court is located in Karlsruhe. This was to show it was separate from the federal government, first based in Bonn, and other federal bodies such as the German intelligence (BND) based in Munich.
Competence.
Federal law helps to describe what the court can do, and how it works. Article 20.3 of the "Grundgesetz" says that each the three branches of the government – the parliament, the ministers and the courts – can only do what the constitution allows. The court can decide that acts of all three branches are not allowed by the constitution and prevent them from happening.
Decisions of the court on material conflicts are applied through a federal law by the Federal Constitutional Court Act (BVerfGG).
Organization.
The court has 16 judges. They are divided into two groups, called senates, of eight judges. The chairman of one senate is also the President of the Court ("Chief Justice"). The chairman of the other senate is the vice president. Most cases are heard by a "chamber" which is three members of one senate. All three judges of the chamber must agree on a decision. A chamber has to use precedent ("past rulings"). If a chamber thinks a precedent should be changed they have to let the case be decided by the Senate as a whole. Similarly, if a Senate thinks a precedent set by the other Senate should be changed precedent of the must ask the "Plenum" (a meeting of all 16 judges).
Decisions by a Senate need an absolute majority of 5 votes (in some cases a two-thirds majority is required, that is, 6 out of 8 votes). The BVerfGG decides which type of cases a senate hears.
Election of judges.
Four judges of each senate are elected by the Bundestag. The others are elected by the Bundesrat. Choosing a judge needs a two-thirds majority.
The judges have a 12-year term, but they must retire when reaching the age of 68. A judge must be at least 40 years old and must be a well-trained jurist. Three out of eight members of each Senate must have been a judge of a Federal Supreme Court. Of the other five members of each Senate, most judges have been a professor of law at a university, a public servant or a lawyer.
At the end of their term, most judges retire from public life. One notable exception was Roman Herzog, who was elected Federal President in 1994, shortly before the end of his term as President of the Court.
