Bogota is the capital (city) of Colombia. More then 7 million people live in it. it is about 2,600 meters above sea level on top a plateau (a mountain with a flat top). The weather is usually nice during the day and cool at night. It has a series of bike paths (or trails that are made for bikes) that wind through the city. It has many recreational and amusement parks open to the public. Samuel Moreno was elected mayor of Bogota on October 29, 2007. He will assume his office on January 1, 2008.
Bogota city has a population of 10 million people. A vast variety of cultural influences turn this city into a cultural paradise.
As every metropoli, Bogota's daily routine is quite stressful. Bogota's population seems to be always in a rush as a consequence of how Bogota has evolveds through history.
Bogota was founded back in 1860 by Gonzalo Jimenes de Quezada, an spanish conqueror. Talking about history, Bogota has had extremely awful moments. In 1948, a presidential candidate, Jorge Elieser Gaitan, was murdered while doing a speech in front of hundreds of persons. This tragic moment brought with it terrible consequences: one of the most remembered one is the "Bogotazo". The "Bogotazo" started as a political party war, the blue party, self named the "conservatives", began to hunt and kill every single member of the red party, the "liberals". Such a sadistic event had not been seen in the history of Colombia since the independence war of this very country. Seeing this terrible unfair situation, the remaining blue party members decided to create the "Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia" (FARC); however, this group was ironically created to protect the oppressed people from their oppressors. Nowadays, this group is known as terrorists and murderers;nevertheless, Colombia's capital city, Bogota, has not being attacked in the last few years.
Bogota, actually is known as the south american "Athens", this due to the many technological advances and to the way of living of the people in this place. Bogota has many places made for tourists, beacuse in there, tourists get to visit every single one of Bogota's museums, libraries and theaters if what they want is a cultural experience.
Children also get the chance to visit come places, Bogota has many amusements parks in which they can learn while having fun. Teenagers and young men have also the change to expend time in the city. Bogota is known for having a busy night life. Thousands of nightclubs and bars open their doors for both national and foreign persons.
