"Bambi" is an animated movie produced by Walt Disney. The fifth movie in the Disney classics series, the movie is lossely based on the 1923 book "Bambi, A Life in the Woods" by Austrian author Felix Salten. The story is about a baby fawn, named Bambi, who learns to grow up in the wild after his mother is shot by hunters. The main characters are Bambi, a white-tailed deer, his parents (the Great Prince of the forest and his unnamed mother), and his friends Thumper (a pink-nosed rabbit), Flower (a skunk), and his childhood friend and future wife, Faline.
For the movie, Disney changed Bambi's species into a white-tailed deer from his original species of Roe Deer, since roe deer don't live in the United States, and the white-tailed deer is more familiar to Americans. The movie received three Academy Award nominations for Best Sound, Best Song for "Love is a song" and Original Music Score. The term "Bambi eyes" was made in response to the movie to describe an innocent look that people can make with their eyes to generate sympathy. On March 1, 2005, a 2-disc Platinum Edition Disney DVD was released, featuring a competely refreashed version of the movie. First released to movie theatres by RKO Radio Pictures on August 13, 1942, "Bambi" has started many controversies do to its dark tones and although the film received good reviews, it was criticized as being inappropriate for children because of the death of Bambi's mother, as well as the scary violence of the hunting scenes, dog attacks, and the forest fire climax. Also, it did poorly at the box office during its original release. In June 2008, the American Film Institute listed its "Ten top Ten", the best ten movies in ten "classic" American film genres. After voting from over 1,500 people, "Bambi" was said to be the third best animated movie.
The Story.
A little fawn called Bambi is born in the woods. He spends his first days of life exploring the forest around him. He makes a friend called Thumper, who is a rabbit. Bambi learns new things everyday. He discoveres birds ("bird" becomes his first word), butterflies, rain, the meadow, and also sees his father (the Great Prince of the Forest) for the first time. So, to put it simply, the first half of the movie mainly involves Bambi's fawnhood, such as a walk through the woods, a day in the meadow, and his first encounter with snow. The most famous part of the movie involves the death of a certain character. This is where people cry in the movie. Bambi and his mother have trouble finding food. One day, Bambi's mother finds a patch of grass, and they eat. We now hear scary music (Man's theme, a low-three mort hum) and Bambi's mother scences danger. She tells Bambi to run, and as they run across an icy field, she screams "Faster! Faster, Bambi! Don't look back! Keep running! Keep running!" We see Bambi make it but we hear a gunshot. Bambi makes it back to the den but finds that his mother is no longer there. He wanders around, desperaty calling for her, and bumps into his father, the Great Prince, who tells him that "your mother can't be with you anymore". Bambi follows his father into the woods, taking one last look behind him. The next spring (Bambi II covers up this gap), we see Bambi and his friends as adults. They meat up with a wise old owl, called Friend Owl, who tells them of the dangers of becoming "twitterpated" (falling in love). They make vows not to become twitterpated, but are in love at first sight in no time. Bambi falls in love with his old childhold friend Faline, and is happily dancing in the clouds until another deer steps in the way. He tries to get Faline to go with him, but Bambi won't stand this and gets into a fight with this deer. Bambi of course wins, and goes on a date with Faline. The Man comes back and makes more trouble for the animals and Bambi saves Faline from a pack of angry dogs. A forrest fire comes, and nearly distorys everything. Bambi has troble getting upo, but his father helps him. They both make it to an island where the animals have gathered. The following spring, everybody goes to see Bambi and Faline's new fawns, with the wise owl saying that Bambi should be proud. The Great Prince literally steps down from his current place as king, and Bambi is left standing proundly as a reprise of the beginning song, Love is a Song, is sung by a chorus.
Production.
Walt Disney wanted to achieve realistic detail in this animated movie. The artists heard teachings from animal experts, and visited the Los Angeles Zoo. A pair of fawns (named Bambi and Faline) were shipped from the area of present day Baxter State Park in Maine to the studio so that the artists could see first-hand the movement of these animals. The source of these fawns, from the Eastern United States, gave the company the idea to change Felix Salten's Roe Deer to a white-tailed deer. The background of the movie was also the Eastern woodlands — one of the earliest and best known artists for the Disney studio, Maurice "Jake" Day spent several weeks in the Vermont and Maine forests, sketching and photographing deer, fawns, and the surrounding wilderness areas.
Release history.
Bambi was released in theaters in 1942, during World War II, and was Disney's fifth full-length animated movie. The famous art direction of Bambi was due to the influence of Tyrus Wong, a former painter who provided eastern and painterly influence to the backgrounds. "Bambi" was re-released to theaters in 1947, 1957, 1966, 1975, 1982, and 1988. It was released on VHS in 1989 (Classics Version), 1997 (Masterpiece Collection Version), and digitally remastered and restored for the March 1, 2005 Platinum Edition DVD. The Platinum Edition DVD went into the "Disney Vault" on January 31 2007. The Masterpiece Version was the first Disney Video to be THX certified.
Similarities with The Lion King.
52 years following the release of Bambi, the movie inspired certain plot ideas for Disney's 32 animated movie, The Lion King. The main characters in the movie are cast as African lions, as Simba, a young lion cub, learns his place in the "Circle of Life". Likewise to Bambi, Simba loses a parent in the course of the film, however, there are no humans noted in the movie, as Simba's father, Mufasa, dies in a wildebeest stampede. Simba also is childhood friends with his intended mate (here named Nala), and they are made aware of their arranged marriage, a topic that was beyond them at the time. Simba's uncle, Scar, is the main villain in the movie, who killed Mufasa, and also planned to kill Simba, in order to be king. Simba flees the kingdom in shame, only to return to challenge his uncle and eventually become the lion king.
Midquel.
"Bambi II", a midquel to "Bambi", was released in the United States on February 7, 2006. Taking place in the middle of "Bambi", it shows the Great Prince of the Forest struggling to raise the motherless Bambi, and Bambi's doubts about his father's love. While the movie was a direct-to-video release in countries like the United States, Japan, Canada, mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, it was a theatrical release in some countries like the United Kingdom, France, Austria, Mexico, Dominican Republic, Brazil, Australia and some other European countries.
