The Bach Choir is a world-famous amateur choir based in London. They sing the music of Johann Sebastian Bach, but also music by many other composers.
History.
The Bach Choir gave their first concert on 26 April 1876 with a performance of Bach’s "Mass in B minor". At this time more and more people in England were becoming interested in the music of Bach, but the "Mass in B minor" had never been performed in England. The conductor Otto Goldschmidt who conducted the concert decided to make it a permanent choir.
In those days all choir members came from rich families (the upper classes). New members had to pass an audition, but they also had to be “proposed” (recommended) by existing members and accepted by the committee. Queen Victoria became Patron of the choir in 1879. The choir usually sang Bach’s motets and church music as well as the "Mass in B minor".
Goldschmidt resigned in 1885 and Charles Villiers Stanford became conductor. Stanford had already become well-known as organist of Trinity College, Cambridge and conductor of the Cambridge University Musical Society. He widened the repertoire of the choir, and the concerts also included works for orchestra. Hubert Parry composed his popular anthem "Blest Pair of Sirens" for the choir to sing at the Golden Jubilee of the Queen in 1887. The Jubilee concert also included the first London performance of Berlioz's "Te Deum", a work dedicated to the late Prince Consort.
20th century.
Towards the end of the nineteenth century the singing of the choir was not so good. Changes were made, including regular auditions for existing choir members, and stopping the requirement for new members to be proposed. Henry Walford Davies became the conductor. He improved the choir which was then taken over by Hugh Allen in 1908.
Hugh Allen found himself conducting a choir which included the young Ralph Vaughan Williams and Adrian Boult. He was strict, but good, and during his time as conductor the choir gave many important first London performances including Vaughan Williams' "Toward the Unknown Region" and "A Sea Symphony" and Parry's "Songs of Farewell".
When Allen resigned in 1921 his place was taken by Ralph Vaughan Williams who had now become a famous composer. He had a gentler approach than Allen. He stayed until 1928 when he left to be able to work more on composition. He was replaced for a short time by Gustav Holst, but he became ill, and Adrian Boult took over for three years. During his time it became tradition to perform Bach’s "St Matthew Passion" every year. This tradition continues today.
Boult was replaced by Reginald Jacques (pronounced: “Jakes”), who had been a pupil of Hugh Allen at Oxford. Jacques stayed for a long time: until 1960. He managed to keep the choir going through World War II, and the annual Carol Concerts became part of their tradition. They made a recording of the St Matthew Passion on old 78 rpm. gramophone records which filled 42 sides.
Jacques was followed by David Willcocks who led the choir almost to the end of the century. He broadened the choir’s repertoire, and they gave the first London performance of Britten's War Requiem, conducted by Britten himself, with Galina Vishnevskaya, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau and Peter Pears as soloists. The choir then recorded the work with the same soloists. Willcocks took the choir on tours to many parts of the world. His last performance was in 1998.
The Choir today.
Today the choir is conducted by David Hill.1998. As well as spending much of his time with The Bach Choir, he is also conductor of the BBC Singers. The choir continues to do new things, as well as keeping up the tradition of Family Carols at the Royal Albert Hall every Christmas, and the "St Matthew Passion" every spring at the Royal Festival Hall.
