A black hole is an object in the universe that has such a strong pull of gravity, even light can't escape it. Until recently, many astronomers did not even know if they existed, but by using telescopes and looking at the universe, they found objects with such a very strong force. They decided it was a black hole with a strong gravitational force. This does not mean that the origin of such a strong force can not be something different than gravitational one.
History.
In 1783, an English geologist named John Michell wrote that it might be possible for something to be so big and heavy that the escape speed from its gravity is equal to speed of light. Gravity gets stronger as something gets bigger or more massive. For a small thing, like a rocket, to escape from a larger thing, like Earth, it has to go upward very fast or it will fall back down. The speed that it must travel upward to get away from Earth's gravity is called escape velocity. Bigger planets (like Jupiter) and stars have stronger gravity than Earth, so the escape velocity is much faster. John Mitchell thought it was possible for something to be so big that the escape velocity would be faster than the speed of light, so even light could not escape.
Some scientists thought Mitchell might be right, but others thought that light had no mass and would not be pulled by gravity. His theory was forgotten.
A few months later, a German physicist named Karl Schwarzschild calculated that a black hole could exist.
In 1930, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar predicted that stars heavier than the sun could collapse when they ran out of hydrogen to burn and died. In 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and H. Snyder calculated that a star would have to be at least three times as massive as the sun to form a black hole.
In 1967, John Wheeler gave black holes the name "black hole" for the first time. Before that, they were called "dark stars."
In 1970, Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose proved that black holes "must" exist. Although the black holes are invisible (they cannot be seen), some of the matter that is falling into them is very bright.
Formation of black holes.
Most black holes are made when a giant star, at least three times bigger than our own Sun, dies. Stars die when they run out of hydrogen or other fuel to burn and start to cool off.
A supergiant star's death is called a supernova. Stars are usually in equilibrium, meaning they are making enough energy to push their mass outward against the force of gravity. When the star runs out of energy, gravity takes over. Gravity pulls the center of the star inward very quickly (so quickly that it would have to be repeated several thousand times before it took up a single second), and it collapses into a little ball. The collapse is so fast and violent that it makes a shock wave, and that causes the rest of the star to explode outward. As the gravity pushes the star inward, the pressure in the center of star reaches to such an extreme level that it enables heavier molecules like iron and carbon interact to release nuclear energy. The release of the energy from the star during a very short period of time (about one hour) is with such a high rate that it outshines an entire galaxy.
The ball in the center is so dense (a lot of mass in a small space, or volume), that if you could somehow scoop only one teaspoon of material and bring it to Earth, it would sink to the core of the planet. This densely packed ball is called a singularity.
Even without a supernova, a black hole will form any time there is a lot of matter in a small space, without enough energy to act against gravity and stop it from collapsing.
If super novas are so shiny, why we do not see them often? Actually, there are usually hundreds of years between naked-eye super nova sightings. It is because the period of being a super nova in a star life cycle is only a few hours out of the billions of years in a star's life span. The probability of looking at a star in sky and that being in super nova state is equal to the ratio of an hour over several billion years.
It is worth mentioning that all of the heavier materials like carbon, oxygen, all the metals, etc, that make the life on the earth possible and are ingredients of all living creatures, can only form in the extreme pressure at the center of a super nova. So we are all a remnant ash from one exploding star several billion years ago.
Appearance of black holes.
The singularity in the middle of a black hole cannot be seen, because light cannot escape its gravity. Around the tiny singularity, there is a large area from which no light can escape. The boundary of this area is called the event horizon. The gravity of the black hole gets weaker at a distance. The event horizon is farthest point where it is still strong enough to trap light. The singularity is like the pipe in a sink drain while the event horizon is like the place where the water falls into the singularity.
Even farther away, light and matter will be pulled toward the black hole. If a black hole is surrounded by matter, the matter will form an "accretion disk" (accretion means "gathering"). An accretion disk looks something like the rings of Saturn. The disk is very hot and shoots x-ray radiation into space. Think of this as the water spinning around the hole before it falls in.
Most black holes are too far away and small to see the accretion disk and jet, though. The best way to know one is there is by seeing how stars, gas, and other things behave around it. With a black hole nearby, even objects as big as a star move in a different way, and a lot faster than they would if the black hole was not there.
Also, if a black hole passes between us and a source of light very far away, the light will become quite distorted, much like a fun-house mirror in a circus, until the black hole moves out of the way. The light can also be magnified, like a magnifying glass, allowing scientists to see things farther away.
We cannot actually see black holes; one way of detecting them is to look at the sky when a black hole passes between us and a source of light, the light bends around the black hole creating a mirror image, so when astronomers see patches of sky that are identical, they may have found a black hole.
Black holes have also been found in the middle of every major galaxy in the universe. These are called supermassive black holes, and are the biggest black holes of all. They formed when the Universe was very young, and also helped to form all the galaxies.
Some black holes are also responsible for making quasars. When astronomers first found quasars, they thought they had found objects close to us, but after using a measuring technique called red shift, they discovered these quasars were actually very far away in the universe.
A quasar occurs when a black hole consumes all the gas surrounding it. As the gas gets close to the black hole itself, it heats up from a process called friction, and glows so brightly that this light can be seen on the other side of the Universe. It is often brighter than the whole galaxy the quasar is in.
A lot of science fiction writers use black holes in their stories, and many scientists wish to find one relatively close to Earth to study one better.
Scientists also think black holes might cause wormholes, theoretical "portals" through space.
