Bündnis Zukunft Österreich ("BZÖ", "Alliance for the Future of Austria") is a political party in Austria. Politically, it is right-wing. From its founding in 2005, it was lead by Jörg Haider who died in October 2008.
Policies.
The BZÖ describes itself as "ideologiefrei, aber zukunftsorientiert und wertebewusst" (free from ideology, but forward-looking and conscious of traditional values). Some of its policies, however, are quite different from those of the Freedom Party.
Differences and similarities to other parties.
Although the party was often claimed to be far-right like the party of the Freedom Party, the Alliance for the Future of Austria differs.
FPÖ and BZÖ are both EU-sceptic parties and in the 2006 general election, the Freedom Party as well as the Alliance for the Future of Austria both claimed they would decrease immigration and opposed Turkish membership in the European Union.
In the Austrian legislative election 2008 campaign the ÖVP sees the lowering of brokerage commissions and the charges for arrears letters of debt collection agencies and winter fuel payments for lower-income households as appropriate measures against the inflation and the Greens want to facilitate the changeover to renewable energy in order to reduce energy prices.
The SPÖ proposes a stricter controlling of prices in addition to the reduction of brokerage commissions. Both the Alliance for the Future of Austria and the Freedom Party see the main problem in the rising fuel prices; the FPÖ demands a ceiling price for fuel, while the BZÖ in addition wants to reduce taxes on fuels.
However the Alliace for the Future of Austria even announced the people's initiative "Preisstop jetzt!" calling for a stop to rising prices to be held; however, due to the necessary timeframe, the period during which people will be able to sign for the initiative will only start after the election, thus limiting its potential impact.
SPÖ, ÖVP and the Greens ratified the Treaty of Lisbon in parliament without a referendum, and only FPÖ and the Alliance for the Future of Austria didn't sign. But afterwards the SPÖ stated that for future treaties of the European Union referendums should be held to let the people decide like in Ireland (where they had a referendum). Due to SPÖ's position change on the EU not only the two opposition parties are using the possibility of EU-referendums before a ratification as subject now. The ÖVP and the Greens are against any referendums on the Lisbon Treaty, SPÖ demands there should be referendums on future treaties of the European Union, the FPÖ is for a referendum for the Lisbon Treaty, and even want a referendum for EU-Withdrawal. However the BZÖ differs a bit in comparison to the Freedom Party, as they are for a referendum about the Lisbon Treaty but not, for an EU-Withdrawal.
Due to help of the former FPÖ and till then BZÖ party-leader and Carinthian LH (LH stands for "Landeshauptmann", simply like Gov. for Governor) Dr. Jörg Haider the party achieved 10.7% in the 2008 elections and gained 21 representatives, so that the BZÖ is currently the 4th strongest Party in the Austrian Parliament just after SPÖ,ÖVP and FPÖ
and before "Die Grünen" (the Greens).
