The Byzantine Empire (or Eastern Roman Empire) is the name given to the Roman Empire that existed during the Middle Ages. Its capital was Constantinople, which is located in Turkey and is now called Istanbul. Unlike the Western Roman Empire, its people spoke Greek, not Latin and had a largely Greek culture and identity.
Start of the Empire, 330 - 476 AD.
The Roman Emperor Constantine I moved the capital of the Roman Empire to the city of Byzantium, and he renamed the city Constantinople. Many years later, after the city of Rome was taken over by Germanic peoples, the entire "Roman" Empire was moved to the Constantinople, and a new empire was born. The new empire still followed the ways of Christian Rome, but it had a smaller territory than the old Roman Empire.
Wars in west.
The Byzantine Empire tried to take back Rome and Italy from the Germans. Between 500 - 600 AD, the Byzantines won many battles and took back Rome.
These gains did not last however. More Germans came and eventually Italy and Rome was lost again. Worse was to come when Avar peoples came to take Bulgaria and Greece from the Byzantines. After a few battles, the Avars won much of northern Greece and Bulgaria. Theses Avars later called themselves Bulgarians.
Wars in the east.
After Rome was captured by Germanic People, the Byzantine Empire continued to control Egypt, Greece, Palestine, Syria and Turkey. However, another Empire, known as the Persian Empire, wanted to take over these lands for itself. Between 476 - 628 AD, the Byzantines and the Persians fought many battles, with many men killed in the fighting. Eventually, the Persians were finally defeated in modern-day Iraq, near the ancient city of Ninevah in 627 AD, allowing the Byzantines to keep her lands.
Unfortunatley for the Byzantines, another enemy appeared; the Arabs. The Byzantines were tired from fighting the Persians and so lost many battles against the Arabs. Palestine, Syria and Egypt were lost. However, the Byzantines defended Turkey well and the Arab advance stopped.
Recovery of the Empire: 717 - 1025 AD.
In 717 AD, the Arabs were defeated outside of the Byzantine Capital, Constantinople, ending the Arab threat in the east. In the west, the Byzantines launched a number of attacks against the Bulgarians. Some of these were successful, others were not and led to the deaths of many Emperors. In time, the Byzantine Empire became stronger and her enemies around her weaker as they fought amongst themselves
Recovery in the west.
Between 1007 - 1014, the Byzantine Emperor Basil II attacked Bulgaria many times and eventually won a great victory. Later, he fully recaptured Greece, adding it back to the Byzantine Empire. He then went on to conquer Bulgaria, which was completed in 1018.
Recovery in the east.
In the east, the Arabs once again became a threat to the Empire. However, Basil II's attacks won many more victories. Much of Syria was restored to the Empire and Turkey and Armenia were secured. After 1025, the Arabs were no longer a threat to the Byzantine Empire.
1025 - 1071.
After the good Byzantine Emperor Basil II died, many bad Emperors came to the throne. They wasted the money of the Empire and reduced her army. This meant that she could not defend herself well against her enemies if they would attack. Later, the Byantines relied on soldiers who fought for money and not for their country, so they were less reliable but more expensive.
Invasion of the Turks, 1071 - 1091.
A large number of people known as the Turks rode on horseback from central Asia and attacked the Byzantine Empire. They took all of Turkey from the Byzantines by 1091. However, the Byzantines received help from people in Europe. This help is known as the First Crusade. Many knights and soldiers left to help the Byzantines but also to secure Jerusalem for Christians, which at the time was in Muslim hands.
The Byzantines survive, 1091 - 1185.
The Byzantine Empire survived and with the help of the Europoeans took back half of Turkey from the Turks, with the other half remaining under the Turks. The Byzantines survived because three good Emperors ruled one after the other, allowing the Byzantines to grow strong again.
The Byzantines become weak again, 1185 - 1261.
After the three good Emperors, the remaining Emperors ruled badly and again wasted a lot of money and soldiers. The Turks attacked again and took back more of Turkey.
In the west, the Europeans betrayed the Byzantines and attacked their capital, Constantinople. The Byzantines lost their capital in 1204 and they did not take it back until 1261.
The Turks destroy the Byzantines, 1261 - 1453.
After the Byzantines took back Constantinople, they were too busy fighting the Europeans who had betrayed them and could not find enough soldiers or money to fight the Turks. Eventually, all of Turkey was lost by 1331.
In 1354, the Turks crossed over from Turkey and into Greece, taking over much of Greece between 1354 - 1450. The Byzatines lost so much land, money and soldiers that they became very weak and begged for help from the Europeans. The Europeans did not help very much. In the end, the Turks attacked Constantinople in April 1453. At the end of May 1453 the Turks captured Constantinople and the Empire came to an end.
