is an ongoing manga series authored by mangaka Tite Kubo. Since its debut in 2001, "Bleach" has been adapted into an anime series, two OVAs, three anime films, a rock musical, and numerous video games. Compilation volumes of the manga have sold over 39 million copies in Japan.
"Bleach" follows the lives of Ichigo Kurosaki, who is a high school student who can see ghosts. A "shinigami" (Soul Reaper or, literally, "death god") named Rukia Kuchiki, meets Ichigo while hunting an evil spirit known as a Hollow. Rukia is wounded during the fight with the spirit and cannot do anything except give her powers to Ichigo. That is how the adventures of Ichigo and Rukia begin. Together they search for Hollows and perform soul burials on souls, cleansing the spirits and sending them to Soul Society. The early parts of the story focus mostly on the characters and their pasts, instead actual job of the "shinigami". As events unfold, the story begins to go deeper into the world of the "shinigami" on the "other side" called Soul Society.
Media information.
The "Bleach" manga was first released in August of 2001 in Shueisha's "Weekly Shonen Jump" magazine. New Japanese-language chapters are featured weekly in the same magazine. The chapters are complied in seven-to-nine chapter "tankōbon" by Shueisha every few months.
The "Bleach" animated TV series is broadcast on Wednesdays by TV Tokyo in Japan. The first 63 episodes were based on the manga, and the next 46 were original to the anime. Beginning with episode 110, the anime has returned to the manga storyline, yet has parts from the previous 46 filler episodes. There are no plans to stop making the series. Also, two OVAs have been produced and two animated films, ', which was released in Japan on December 16, 2006, and Bleach: The Diamond Dust Rebellion, which was released on December 22, 2007.
VIZ Media has released 22 English-language volumes of the manga in North America, and many scanlation groups release unofficial English translations of new chapters.
Introduction.
Ichigo Kurosaki is a teenager who has always been able to see spirits. The story begins with the sudden appearance of an oddly-dressed stranger in Ichigo's bedroom. This stranger is the "shinigami" Rukia Kuchiki, who is surprised that he can see her. While they are talking a Hollow comes. After Rukia is badly wounded while fighting to protect Ichigo, she decides to transfer half of her powers to Ichigo, hoping to give him a chance to fight the hollow. By accident Ichigo absorbs all of Rukia's powers instead, and he defeats the Hollow easily.
