Ben Hall (May 9 1837 - May 5 1865) was a famous Australian bushranger. Most bushrangers were simply criminals and thieves. Ben Hall is one of the few bushrangers, like Ned Kelly, who became famous and were seen as heroes. Hall is part of a long history that includes people such as Robin Hood in England, or Jesse James in the USA.
In folklore the typical outlaw hero is a simple farmer forced into crime by cruel and harsh police actions. He is a friend of the poor, kind to women and children, and an enemy of the rich. He dies bravely in a battle against the more powerful forces of a cruel and harsh government. A study of history shows Ben Hall to have been a very clever criminal. With many friends and relatives to help, he was able to avoid being captured by the police for many years.
Early life.
Ben Hall was born on 9 May 1837, at Wallis Plains, near Maitland, in the Hunter Valley of New South Wales. His parents were Benjamin Hall (b. Bristol, England 1802) and Eliza Somers (b. Dublin, Ireland 1807). Both of his parents were convicts and sent to gaol in New South Wales. They married in 1834. Ben was their fourth child. After they were let out of gaol, they moved to the Hunter Valley. Benjamin worked for Samuel Clift on the Doona run (farm). Around 1839, Benjamin started a farm in a lonely valley north of Murrurundi. He built a hut and began farming cattle. He also found wild cattle and horses in the nearby hills. In 1842, he bought a small block of land at Haydonton, near Murrurundi and started a butcher shop. The family was hard-working, but there were problems with the police over stolen cattle and horses. Near the end of 1850, Benjamin moved down to the Lachlan River area. He took his children Ben, William, and Mary, as well as his stepson Thomas Wade with him.
Sandy Creek.
After his father died in 1851 Ben worked on many cattle farms along the Lachlan River. He was known as a hard-working and honest stockman.
On February 29, 1856, at the age of 19, Hall married Bridget Walsh (1841 - 1923) at Bathurst. Bridget was the daughter of a farmer. On August 7, 1859, they had a son, whom they named Henry. One of Bridget's sisters was the mistress (lover) of bushranger Frank Gardiner; another sister married John Maguire. In 1860, Ben Hall and John Maguire leased the "Sandy Creek" farm of about south of Forbes. Hall built a house, sheds and stockyards. He raised cattle that he sold at the Lambing Flat goldfield. He met Frank Gardiner who had a butchers shop at Lambing Flat.
Bushranger.
We do not know why but Ben Hall's life changed. By early 1862, his marriage was in trouble. Biddy left Ben and moved in with a neighbour, Jim Taylor, taking young Henry with her. There were many criminals living and working in the area where Ben Hall lived. He became friends with Frank Gardiner. Gardiner was already wanted for robbery and had shot 2 policemen before escaping. On April 14, 1862 Gardiner and Hall robbed 3 bullock wagon drivers. One week later the drivers saw him at the Forbes horse races. Police Inspector Sir Frederick Pottinger, who was also at the races, told the police to arrest Ben for using guns in a robbery with Gardiner. The jury at the courthouse at Orange did not think there was enough evidence to show that Hall had been one of the robbers. After he was released, the police kept a close watch on Ben Hall, to see where he went and what he was doing.
Gold escort robbery.
On 15 June, 1862, Gardiner and a group of 10 men, including Hall, robbed the gold escort coach near Eugowra. They stole more than £14,000 pounds in gold and money. This is about $4 million in 2003 money value. This was Australia's biggest gold robbery. Hall and several others were arrested in July. Once again the police were unable find proof that Hall was one of the robbers. The police let him go at the end of August. When Hall returned to the farm he found his house burned down. His cattle had been left in the stockyards and had died from starvation (not having enough to eat). There are claims that this was done by Pottinger to punish Hall, but not all historians agree. Hall and John Maguire needed money to pay their legal costs. They were forced to sell the lease of their farm at "Sandy Creek" to a Forbes hotel owner called John Wilson.
With his wife, young son, and his farm gone, Ben Hall slowly moved into a life of crime as a bushranger. On March 1, 1863, Hall together with bushrangers Patrick Daley (Patsy) and John O'Meally, were nearly captured in the Weddin mountains by by Police Inspector Norton and black tracker Billy Dargin. Black trackers were aboriginals used by the police for their skills in following people in the bush. After shooting at each other, Norton was captured and robbed. Dargin managed to escape into the bush. Hall and Daley chased Dargin through the bush for. When they caught him they told him they admired his bravery. They let him go but told him they would rob the police camp that night.. While the police were out looking for them, the gang stole guns and ammunition from the police camp. The police chased them but the gang had stolen better and faster horses and easily escaped.
Ben Hall's Gang.
Frank Gardiner went to Queensland to hide from the police after the Eugowra robbery. Hall took over as leader of the gang. For 3 years Hall carried out well planned and daring crimes. They robbed mainly farmhouses, stagecoaches carrying mail and gold, and country hotels. Hall's gang included John Gilbert as his lieutenant, his main helper. In 1863 the other three members were John O'Meally, John Vane and Michael Burke. Burke was only 17 years old. He was shot and killed on October 24, 1863 during a robbery at Henry Keightley's house at Dunn's Plains. Vane wanted to shoot Keightley for killing Burke, but Ben Hall stopped him. Instead he asked for a £500 ransom. Mrs Keightley had to ride to Bathurst at night to get the money from the bank. A few weeks later on November 19, O'Meally was shot and killed during an attempted robbery on Goimbla Station (farm).. Vane gave himself up and was sent to gaol. Two other men, James Mount (called "The Old Man") and John Dunleavy, joined the gang but were soon captured. In May 1864 Hall and Gilbert were joined by John Dunn.
Canowindra.
Hall's gang robbed Robinson's Hotel in Canowindra and held all the people of the town hostage for 3 days. Nobody was hurt and Hall even got the people to play music and dance. The local policeman was locked in his own cell. When the people were set free Hall paid them money. The gang paid the hotel owner for the food and drink that they had used. The capture of the town is made famous in a song called "John Gilbert".
The Jugiong Robbery.
The gang was regularly robbing people and holding up the mail coaches, south of Goulburn on the main Sydney to Melbourne Road. On November 15, 1864, the gang tried to rob the Gundagai - Yass mail coach near Jugiong. While waiting for the coach, the gang captured and robbed over 60 people, who were traveling along the road. One of those captured was a policeman, James McLaughlin. He fired six shots at the gang, but didn't have any more ammunition and gave himself up. The policeman on the coach, William Roche, was ordered by Police Magistrate Alfred Rose, who was riding inside, not to shoot and draw fire. The driver, Bill Geoghegan, ordered him to get off the coach or he would kick him off. Hall and Dunn began firing at two other policemen who were riding behind the coach. Sub-Inspector William O'Neill was quickly captured. John Gilbert and Sergeant Edmund Parry were shooting at each other from a close distance. Gilbert shot dead Sergeant Parry.. Constable Roche escaped into the bush. The gang quickly took all the money and valuable items and rode away. Parry is buried at Gundagai. On his headstone it says "Edmund Parry, Sergeant of the N.S.W. Police, who lost his life in the execution (doing) of his duty whilst courageously (bravely) endeavouring (trying) to capture the bushranger Gilbert by whom he was shot dead near Jugiong." Two days later the gang robbed the mail coach between Yass and Lambing Flat. On December 5, they robbed the mail coach between Binalong and Burrowa.
Binda.
On Boxing Day, 1864, Ben Hall, John Gilbert and John Dunn rode into the town of Binda with 3 local girls. The girls were Christina McKinnon aged 25, believed to be Hall's lover, Ellen Monks aged 17 and her sister Margaret Monks aged 19. Together with the girls the gang robbed a shop owned by Edward Morriss. They locked all the local people into the Flag Hotel. They made everyone dance to celebrate Boxing Day. Morriss got out of the hotel through a back window at 2.00 a.m. and set off to tell the police. Gilbert fired several shots at him. Ben Hall got angry and so he set fire to Morriss's shop and burned it down. The gang and the girls left the town. Christina McKinnon and Ellen Monks were arrested for helping the bushrangers and were sent to Sydney for trial. Morriss joined the police force.
Pottinger.
The police were under a lot of pressure to catch the Ben Hall gang. The gang had been able to roam the country and go anywhere they liked. They made the police look like fools. Sir Frederick Pottinger came up with an unusual plan. He knew the gang liked race horses and horse racing; they had been seen at many country race meetings. Pottinger planned to ride in the races at Wowingragong, near Forbes, on January 5, 1865. He thought this would bring the gang out into the open where his men would be able to capture them. The Ben Hall gang did not appear, and Pottinger lost his job. The Inspector-General of Police thought that Pottinger had disgraced the police force by riding in races while he was supposed to be working. Pottinger decided to go to Sydney to make the police force change its mind, but on the way he accidentally shot himself and died.
Death of Constable Nelson.
On January 26, 1865, the gang held up 10 people on the road near Goulburn. They were chased into the bush by a group of policemen. A couple of hours later the gang rode into the town of Collector. Hall and Gilbert robbed the Commercial Hotel. John Dunn stayed outside. When the local policeman, Constable Nelson, arrived, Dunn shot him dead at close range. One of Nelson's 9 children saw the shooting. Gilbert robbed Nelson's body of money and other valuables and took his gun. They left the town quickly and went into hiding.
The police put more effort into the hunt for the bushrangers. In February they went to a house near Queanbeyan and found the gang had only just left. The police thought that the gang might be with a friend, Thomas Byrne. They went to the Breadalbane Hotel and arrested 4 men that were known to be friends of the gang. This would stop them giving the bushrangers any warnings. The police surrounded Byrne's farm. As they moved passed the open door of the barn, the bushrangers began shooting. One policeman, Wiles, was shot in the hand and the leg. The bushrangers escaped into the bush, but Ben Hall was shot as he ran away.
The Araluen Robbery.
On March 4, 1865, the gang robbed the mail coach at between Goulburn and Gundaroo. A couple of days later they stole horses from 2 farms. In March 13, the gang tried to hold up the Araluen gold coach. Gold had been found at Araluen in the 1860's. The gold coach usually had a policeman with a gun sitting next to the driver. There were 2 more policemen on the back of the carriage. Four more policemen rode on horses in front and behind the coach. The gold was kept in a safe which was bolted to floor of the coach. (The coach has survived and is being restored). The bushrangers began shooting at the coach. Constable Kelly was shot in the chest. He was badly hurt, but he crawled to side of the road and began shooting at the bushrangers. The police were able to keep the bushrangers away from the coach. Another policeman, Trooper Byrne was shot in the foot. The bushrangers quickly left when miners with guns arrived from the town.
Outlaw.
In two years Ben Hall's Gang, as well as killing two policemen, had reportedly robbed 10 mail coaches, held up 21 properties, stole 23 racing horses, and taken over the village of Canowindra three times.
In early 1865, the government made a new law to help capture Ben Hall, John Gilbert and John Dunn. The "Felons Apprehension Act" was rushed quickly through the New South Wales Parliament. They made Hall and his friends "outlaws". This meant that they could be killed by anyone at any time without warning. They also put a reward of £1000 for the capture of Ben Hall.
The bushrangers still kept busy robbing people. They robbed a farm, Wallendbeen Station, and wanted to know where the police were. A group of Chinese gold diggers were robbed and one was shot in the leg by Gilbert. The next day, March 18, the police found the gang trying to steal horses from Wallendbeen. In the shooting, Gilbert shot Senior Constable Keane in the shoulder. Sergeant Murphy shot Gilbert in the arm. The gang escaped into the bush. They made their way to a shepherd's hut and forced the shepherd to put a bandage on Gilbert's arm. Hall and Dunn walked to a nearby farm, Beggan Beggan station. They held up the 16 farm workers and stole horses, saddles and bridles. They went back to get Gilbert and then again robbed the farm and took guns, ammunition and food.
Hall, Gilbert and Dunn robbed the bank in Forbes and took £81 on March 25. More police were sent to the area, and they were given better guns. A month later the gang were seen near Marengo. A couple of days later they stole horses and food from another farm, Yamma station. This was the gang's last robbery.
Capture and Death.
By May 1865, Ben Hall decided to leave New South Wales. But a man who had once given the gang help told the police where Hall was hiding. During the night Ben Hall was found sleeping by 8 policemen at Billabong Creek, near Forbes. The police were armed with double-barrelled shotguns and.56 calibre Colt rifles. Led by sub-Inspector Davidson the police surrounded Ben Hall while he was asleep. When he woke up at dawn on 5 May, 1865, Hall was shot in the back 30 times as he tried to run away. A newspaper report described his body as being "riddled" with bullets. He did not shoot his gun. The first rifle shots of the police cut his belt in two and his guns fell to the ground. The man who told the police where Hall was sleeping got £500 from the reward. The other £500 pounds was shared by the police who captured him.
Ben Hall's body was put in a sack, tied to a horse and taken back to Forbes. An official inquest (held in a court to find out how someone died) was held. Ben Hall was buried in Forbes Cemetery on Sunday May 7, 1865. A lot of people went to see him buried. The original wooden grave marker and fence were burnt in a bushfire. Two brothers from Forbes, the Pengilly brothers, put a headstone on the grave in the 1920s. The tree that Hall slept under before he was shot dead became an attraction. People in the 1920's were still able to see bullets in the tree trunk. The tree was destroyed in a bushfire in 1926. His grave is well looked after and many people still come to look at it. Ben Hall's gun, a Colt revolver is now in the National Library of Australia.
Gilbert and Dunn were nearly caught by the police a week later at Binalong. Gilbert was shot dead as he tried to run away. Dunn got away, but six months later a friend told the police where Dunn was hiding. He was captured, tried for murder and hanged in Sydney on March 19, 1866.
Ben Hall, still remembered.
In 2007, Peter Bradley, a descendant of Ben Hall's younger brother Henry, said he wanted to reopen the inquest into the bushranger's death. Bradley said that the "Felon Apprehension Act" was not yet law when Hall was killed. The first inquest found that Hall was deliberately killed, but this was allowed because the new law meant Hall was an outlaw. The parliament had passed the law on April 12, but it did not become law until May 10. This was 5 days after Hall was shot to death by police.
A memorial called "Ben Hall's Wall" is located in Breeza, south of Gunnedah, New South Wales. "Ben Halls Gap National Park" is a small section of State Forest located south of Nundle, New South Wales. It is not named after the bushranger, but after his father, Benjamin Hall.
Art.
The story of Ben Hall has been shown in many art works.
