Britney Spears (born 2 December 1981 in McComb, Mississippi), is an American Pop singer.
Early success and rise to fame.
Britney Spears was born in McComb, Mississippi, about 25 miles away from where she grew up in Kentwood, Louisiana. Her parents are James (Jamie) and Lynne Spears. She has an older brother, Bryan (born 1977) and a younger sister, Jamie-Lynn (born 1991). Ever since Britney was very young she liked to sing, dance and act so she took lessons. Britney also did gymnastics and she was very good at it. When Britney was eight, she tried out for a TV program for children in called the "New Mickey Mouse Club". She was great, but too young. Every summer for the next three years, Britney went a school for performing arts in New York City. It was a long way from home for a young child, her mother and baby sister from a small town to go but Britney's family believed in her. At the age of 11, Britney tried out once again for the Mickey Mouse Club and was on the show from 1993. It was filmed in Lakeland, Florida Others on the show during this time were singers Christina Aguilera, Justin Timberlake, and JC Chasez (who would later be members of the band *NSYNC), and actors Ryan Gosling and Keri Russell. After the Mickey Mouse Club ended in 1994, Britney Spears went back to her hometown, Kentwood and went to high school. In 1995 and 1996, she was voted Junior High School Most Beautiful. Britney liked her home but really wanted to sing and dance again. In 1997 she joined a girl group called Innosense but she wanted to be a solo singer. Later that year, the 16 year old Britney was signed by Jive Records.
In 1998, she made her first song, "...Baby One More Time". The music video for the song is famous for showing Britney in a schoolgirl uniform.
Continued success.
Spears is currently the 8th best selling female artist in America and has sold 83 million records worldwide. She has one Grammy, three MTV Video Music Awards and has her own star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Her most successful songs to date are Toxic, Baby One More Time, and Womanizer.
Spears is currently putting the final touches on her 6th studio album Circus. The lead single Womanizer has been released as has an accompanying music video. Spears will conduct a world tour for this album in 2009.
Movies.
In 2002, Spears play the lead role, Lucy Ann Wagner, in the movie "Crossroads".
She also had a small role in the movie "Austin Powers in Goldmember" in 2002.
Family life.
On January 3, 2004, Spears married her childhood friend Jason Allan Alexander in Las Vegas, Nevada, United States. The marriage was annulled only 55 hours later.
On September 18, 2004, Spears married Kevin Federline. They had a son together on September 14, 2005 named Sean Preston Spears Federline. On September 12, 2006, Britney gave birth to her second child, another son named Jayden James Spears Federline.
In November 2006, Spears filed for divorce from Kevin.
In September of 2007, Spears lost some custody of her two children, Sean Preston and Jayden James, to her ex-husband, Kevin Federline.
At the beginning of January 2008, Spears lost full custody of her children after a mental breakdown. The media reported mostly on Britney Spears' mental issues and custody battle with ex-husband Federline.
Since February 2008, her father has taken control of her estate and has helped Britney to get her life back to normal. She is said to regain entire control at the end of 2008.
Britney currently has monitored visits with her children at least 4 times a week and is allowed to pick them up from pre-school. The judge overseeing the visits has said she has made impressive progress.
