Barry James Marshall, AC FRS FAA (born 30 September 1951) is an Australian doctor and winner of the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. He is Professor of Clinical Microbiology at the University of Western Australia. Marshall is well-known for proving that bacteria "Helicobacter pylori" are the cause of most stomach ulcers. This changed years of medical belief which said that ulcers were caused by stress, spicy foods, and too much acid. He has recently taken a part-time position at the Pennsylvania State University.
Early years.
Marshall was born in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia. He lived in Kalgoorlie and Carnarvon until moving to Perth at the age of seven. He went to high school at Newman College, Perth. At the University of Western Australia, he studied medicine and surgery. He married his wife, Adrienne, in 1972. In 1972 he was also the Western Australian state yo-yo champion.
Life and research.
In 1979 Marshall became a Registrar in Medicine at the Royal Perth Hospital. At the hospital he met Robin Warren, a pathologist who was interested in gastritis. They were both training in internal medicine at Royal Perth Hospital in 1981. Together they looked at spiral bacteria in gastritis. In 1982 they grew a culture of "H. pylori". They worked on their idea that there was a bacterial cause of peptic ulcer and gastric cancer. Their idea was laughed at by scientists and doctors who did not believe that any bacteria could live in the acidic stomach. Marshall said that "Everyone was against me, but I knew I was right". Other doctors said they wouldn't believe it until the "H. pylori" idea could be proved.
Marshall and Warren tried to give the bacteria to piglets in 1984, but it didn't work. Marshall drank some of the bacteria and soon developed gastritis with achlorhydria. He had stomach discomfort, nausea, vomiting and halitosis (bad smelling breath). On the 14th day of the infection, biopsies of Marshall's stomach did not show any bacteria. His body may have got rid of the bacteria without help. His wife made him take antibiotics immediately so there was no way of checking the negative result again. He did not develop antibodies to H.pylori. This means that natural immunity can sometimes get rid of H.pylori infection. His illness and recovery, showed the link between "H. pylori" and gastritis, but not for peptic ulcer. This experiment was published in 1985 in the Medical Journal of Australia and is among the most cited articles from the journal.
After this work at Fremantle Hospital, Marshall did research at Royal Perth Hospital (1985-86) and at the University of Virginia, USA (1986-1996), before going back to Australia. He held a Burnet Fellowship at the University of Western Australia from 1998-2003. He is still looking at "H. pylori" and runs the H.pylori Research Laboratory at UWA.
Awards and honours.
In 2005, the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm gave the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine to Dr. Marshall and Dr. Warren for finding the bacterium "Helicobacter pylori" and its part in gastritis and peptic ulcer disease.
He was made a Companion of the Order of Australia in 2007.
