The Jardim Botânico de Curitiba, in Portuguese, or the Botanical Garden of Curitiba, in English, is also known as the "Jardim Botânico Fanchette Rischbieter". This is a park located in the city of Curitiba, the capital of the state of Paraná, and the biggest city in southern Brazil. It is the major tourist attraction of the city, and it houses part of the campus of the Federal University of Paraná. In 2007, was the most voted place in an online election to choose the "Seven Wonders of Brazil". The international identification code is CURIT.
Description.
Inaugurated on October 5, 1991, the most know Curitiba's picture postcard landmark contains many copies plants of Brazil and from other countries, spread across boulevards and greenhouses of iron and glass - the main one of them inspired in the Crystal Palace (a building that existed in London in 1851). The project is of the architect Abraão Assad, who also planned the Botanical Museum.
This botanical garden was created in the style of French gardens. Once the portal of entry, may be seen extensive gardens in the French style in the middle of fountains, waterfalls and lakes, and the main greenhouse of 458 square meters, which holds in its interior, copies plants characteristic of tropical regions. It rolls out its carpet of flowers to the visitors right at the entrance. This occupies 240.000 m² in area. The principal greenhouse, in an art nouveau style with a modern metallic structure, looks like the mid-19th century Crystal Palace in London, England. The Botanic Museum, which provides a national reference collection of native flora, attracts researchers from all over the world. It includes many botanic species from the moist Atlantic Forests of eastern Brazil.
The native forest have many paths for walk. Behind the greenhouse is the Museum of, the Polish Brazilian artist who took up the cause of environmental conservation; with 1,320 square meters of area, divided into multimedia classrooms, an auditorium with 60 seats and lounge with several exhibitions of works donated by visual artist, represented by sculptures and reliefs, as well as photographs, videos, publications and educational materials.
In the other side is the Botanical Museum, a wooden building which entrance using a bridge made of wood also. Actually, the Botanical Museum of Curitiba has the fourth largest herbarium in the country. In front of the construction there is a pond with carp, turtles, teal, herons, etc, and offers a lake, an auditorium, a library, an expositions area and a theatre. The park also has tennis courts and a cycle track.
The Botanical Museum of Curitiba.
The "Museu Botânico de Curitiba" (Botanical Museum of Curitiba) is located inside the Botanical Garden of the city; has ample space for exhibitions, library and auditorium. Was founded in 1965, when the botanical Gerdt Günther Hatschbach donated his private collection to the municipality of Curitiba. Today, the collection is the fourth largest in Brazil, with more than 333,000 specimens.
The Museum has developed an exchange program for botanical material, and exchanges material with 207 institutions world wide (53 in Brazil, 154 in other parts of planet). Due to this program, around 90% of the collection has been identified by specialists; it makes the Botanical Museum of Curitiba an international reference for botanical material - receives annually an average of 400 research scientist visitors, and includes specialists and graduate students.
Each year, the collection increases by approximately 15,000 specimens.
Address.
On Eng. Ostoja Roguski Street, s/n°, Jardim Botânico Neighborhood, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil. Free open daily to visitors from 6 am till 9 pm during summertime and from 6 am till 8 pm during the rest of the year. Phone: +55 (41) 3362-5289.
