Bolt is an animated movie that was be released on November 21, 2008, and is Disney's 47th animated feature. It stars the voices of John Travolta, Miley Cyrus, Malcolm McDowell, Claire Holt, Diedrich Bader, Nick Swardson, Greg Germann, Susie Essman, and Mark Walton. The movie is rated PG by the MPAA for some mild action and peril. The movie is Miley Cyrus's first movie to be rated PG, while her first two movies, "Big Fish" was rated PG-13 and "Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus: Best of Both Worlds Concert" was rated G. This was also be Walt Disney Pictures' first computer-animated film to be rated PG since 2000's "Dinosaur". A sneak-peak of "Bolt" was shown on "Beverly Hills Chihuahua".
The story.
The movie is about a dog named Bolt who is on a TV show and thinks he has super powers, but finds out that they are fake.
Making.
The original name of the movie was going to be "American Dog", but Pixar's John Lasseter changed this as well as many other things about the movie. He has also canceled many other projects for Disney, including "The Arisocats 2" and "Dumbo II". The look of the movie was inspired by the paintings of Edward Hopper and the cinematography of Vilmos Zsigmond. As in "Rapunzel", new technology in non-photorealistic rendering (NPR) will to be used to give it a special visual appearance. To give the movie's 3D backgrounds a hand-painted look, the company artists used new patented technology designed specifically for the movie. The design of Rhino in his plastic ball was based on John Lassetter's pet chinchilla, which was brought to an animators' retreat during the movie's production.
Soundtrack and score.
The score to "Bolt" was composed by John Powell. The soundtrack featured the film's score and two original songs - "I Thought I Lost You" by "Bolts stars John Travolta and Miley Cyrus as well as "Barking at the Moon" by Rilo Kiley singer Jenny Lewis. The soundtrack was released on November 18, 2008.
Although Motörhead has a song in the movie, they do not seem to appear in either the soundtrack or the score. Motörhead's song, "Dog-Face Boy" (from their Sacrifice album) is in a mailroom scene where a young worker is listening to it on his headphones and inadvertently wraps Bolt up in a box that gets shipped off to New York City.
Premiere.
The premiere was held at El Capitan Theatre on November 16, 2008 in the arrivals and red carpet attended by John Travolta, Miley Cyrus, Malcolm McDowell, Claire Holt, Diedrich Bader, Nick Swardson, Greg Germann, Susie Essman and Randy Savage.
Box office.
On its opening weekend, the movie opened #3 with $27 million behind "Twilight" and "Quantum of Solace".
Academy Award.
Walt Disney Pictures has chosen Bolt as their entry in the category for Best Animated Feature at the Academy Awards, alongside the Disney/Pixar animated movie, "WALL-E".
Video game.
A video game based on the movie was released on November 18, 2008 for Nintendo DS, Wii, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PC, and also for mobile phone. An application has also been released for the app version of Apple's iTunes Store, called "RhinoBall".
Taglines.
"A hero is unleashed 2008.'Fully Awesome 2008'Fully Awesome. Ridonculous. Let It Begin."
