The Battle of the Mediterranean was the name given to the naval campaign fought in the Mediterranean Sea during World War II.
For the most part, the campaign was fought between the forces of the Italian Royal Navy ("Regia Marina"), supported by other Axis naval forces,
and the forces of the British Royal Navy, supported by other Allied naval forces.
Each side had three overall goals in this battle. The first was to attack the supply lines of the other side. The second was to keep open its own supply lines, the Axis to their own armies in North Africa and the Allies to supply the island of Malta. The third was to destroy the ability of the opposing navy to wage war at sea.
Outside of the Pacific, the Mediterranean saw the largest conventional naval warfare during the war. In particular, Allied forces struggled to supply and retain the key naval and air base of Malta.
Forces.
The Axis forces in this campaign were:-
The Allied forces in this campaign were:-
History.
On 10 June 1940, Italy declared war on Britain and France. On the following day, Italian bombers attacked Malta on what was to be the first of many raids.
The first clash between the rival fleets, the Battle of Calabria, took place on 9 July 1940, just four weeks after the start of hostilities. This was inconclusive (neither side won), and was followed by a series of small ship actions (the battle of the "Espero" convoy, battle of Cape Spada) during the autumn.
In November, the RN mounted an aerial attack on the Italian fleet in Taranto harbour, crippling 3 capital ships and changing the balance of power in the Mediterranean.
Three months later the fleets clashed again at the Battle of Cape Matapan. This was a major Allied victory; 3 Italian cruisers were sunk, and a battleship damaged in a 2-day battle ending in a night action.
Following this the Allies suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Crete, supporting the army when the island was invaded by the Germans.
Following the battle of Crete in the summer of 1941, the Royal Navy got the better of things in the central Mediterranean in a series of successful convoy attacks, ([such as the "Duisburg" convoy and the Battle of Cape Bon) until the events around the First Battle of Sirte and the Raid on Alexandria in December swung the balance of power in the Axis favour.
The Italian Navy's most successful attack was when divers planted mines on British battleships during the raid on Alexandria harbour (19 December 1941). HMS "Queen Elizabeth" and HMS"Valiant" were sunk but later raised and returned to active service.
A series of hard fought convoy battles (Second Battle of Sirte in March, Operations Harpoon and Vigorous in June, and Operation Pedestal in August) ensured Malta's survival, until the Allies regained the advantage in November 1942.
In Sept 1943 with the Italian collapse and the surrender of Italian fleet, naval actions in Mediterranean became restricted to actions against U-boats and by small craft in the Adriatic and Aegean seas.
