The backpacker murders is when lots of people were killed in Australia from 1990-1996, and all of their bodies were found in Belangalo State Forest, which is close to Sydney. Police think that a person called Ivan Milat killed all of these people, and they say that 7 people died.
What happened.
7 people were found in Belangalo State Forest. Some of these people were visiting Australia. Some of these people were visiting Sydney from other parts of Australia. Some of these people were from Sydney. Some of these people were by themselves. Some of these people were with a friend. The 7 people were all different from each other.
Television report.
On the TV they said that tourists were killed, but not everyone who died was a tourist.
The crimescene.
The 7 people were found all over Belangalo State Forest, which is a big area. Some of them had their heads chopped off. Someone had sex with some of them. Some of them had their clothes taken off. Some of them were wearing clothes that belonged to other ones. Some of them had bits of their bodies cut off and put somewhere else. Some of the bodies were mixups of other bodies. Some of the bodies were by themselves.
Deaths.
Some of the people had been killed with a shovel. Some had been killed with an axe. Some had been killed with a gun. Some had been strangled.
The 7 people who died had nothing in common. People who tried to find out who did it said that it must have been 7 different people who killed them. They said that they were probably a part of a gang. They said that a big gang like the mafia might have killed these people.
Catching Ivan Milat.
Ivan Milat went to court, and people in court said that Ivan Milat did kill all of these people.
The mystery.
A man named Chopper Read said that he knew who killed the people in the "backpacker murders". He said it was a big gang in Melbourne that killed them.
Some people think that other people helped Ivan Milat. Some people said his brothers helped him, or a girl, or lots of other people. Police have said that there are more than 30 people that went missing that might have been killed by Ivan Milat.
