A bushranger was a thief who lived in the Australian bush. Bushrangers often stole valuables from banks or coaches. There were more than 2000 bushrangers during Australia's past. Most were simply criminals and thieves. A few bushrangers became famous and were seen as heroes. They are part of a long history that includes men such as Robin Hood and Dick Turpin in England, or Jesse James and Billy the Kid in the USA.
History.
The word "bushranger" was first used in Australia in 1805 to describe three men who had stopped a cart near Sydney. From that time the word has been used for criminals who attacked people on the roads or in the bush (the Australian countryside away from towns).
The first bushrangers were escaped convicts. One of the last bushrangers was Ned Kelly who was captured in 1880.
1788 to 1840s: convict escapees.
The first bushrangers were escaped convicts. They stole supplies from remote settlements and travellers. Sometimes they sold the stolen goods to other free settlers.
John "Black" Caesar is generally regarded as the first bushranger. He bolted from Sydney Cove several times before being shot dead in 1796.
Bold Jack Donahue is recorded as the last convict bushranger. He was reported in newspapers around 1827 as being responsible for an outbreak of bushranging on the road between Sydney and Windsor. Throughout the 1830s he was regarded as the most notorious bushranger in the colony. Leading a band of escaped convicts, Donahue became central to Australian folklore as the Wild Colonial Boy.
Bushranging was common on the mainland, but Van Diemen's Land (later known as Tasmania) produced the most violent and serious outbreaks of convict bushrangers. Hundreds of convicts were at large in the bush, farms were abandoned and martial law was proclaimed. Indigenous outlaw Musquito defied colonial authorities and led attacks on settlers.
1850s: gold rush era.
The bushrangers' heyday was the Gold Rush years of the 1850s and 1860s. Gold can be easily carried and also it can easily be turned into cash. The goldfields were in remote locations and there were not very many police to guard the gold.
George Melville was hanged in front of a large crowd for robbing the McIvor gold escort near Castlemaine in 1853.
1860s to 1870s.
Bushranging numbers flourished in New South Wales with the rise of the colonial-born sons of poor, often ex-convict squatters who were drawn to a more glamourous life than mining or farming.
Much of the activity in this era was in the Lachlan Valley, around Forbes, Yass and Cowra.
Frank Gardiner, John Gilbert and Ben Hall led the most notorious gangs of the period. Other active bushrangers included Dan Morgan, based around the Murray River, and Captain Thunderbolt, killed outside Uralla, New South Wales.
1880s to 1900s.
The increasing push of settlement, increased police efficiency, improvements in rail transport and communications technology, such as telegraphy, made it increasingly difficult for bushrangers to evade capture.
Among the last bushrangers was the Kelly Gang led by Ned Kelly, who were captured at Glenrowan, Victoria in 1880, two years after they were outlawed.
In 1900 the Governor Brothers terrorised much of northern New South Wales.
Public perception.
In Australia, bushrangers often attract public sympathy.
Entertainment.
In the same way that outlaws feature in many films of the American western genre, bushrangers regularly feature in Australian literature, film, music and television.
Bold Jack Donohue was the first bushranger to have inspired bush ballads.
"Robbery Under Arms", a novel by Thomas Alexander Browne (writing as Rolf Boldrewood) was published in serial form in the "Sydney Mail" from 1882 to 1883. It is an early description of the life and acts of fictional bushrangers. It has been the basis of several films and a television series.
Ned Kelly was the subject of the world's first feature length film, "The Story of the Kelly Gang", released in 1906. In the 1970 release "Ned Kelly", he was portrayed – to limited popular acclaim – by Mick Jagger of The Rolling Stones. Kelly has been the subject of many more movies, television series, written fiction and music.
Dan "Mad Dog" Morgan was the subject of a feature film, "Mad Dog Morgan" (1976), starring Dennis Hopper.
Ben Hall and his gang were the subject of several Australian folk songs, including "Streets of Forbes".
