Baoruco, also written Bahoruco (but the "h" is not pronounced), is a Dominican province, located in the western part of the country, in the "Hoya de Enriquillo" valley. Its capital city is Neiba (or Neyba).
It was created on 1943. It was part of the Barahona province before being elevated to the category of province. It was called Baoruco because the northern side of the Sierra de Bahoruco was part of the province; with the creation of the Independencia Province, that part went to the new province but the name was not changed.
Location.
Baoruco is bordered to the north by the San Juan province, to the east by the Azua and Barahona provinces, and to the south and west by the Independencia province.
Municipalities.
Baoruco has a total area of 1,282.23 km². It has 2.6% of the area of the Dominican Republic and it is ranked as the 17th (out of 31 plus the National District) largest province.
There are five municipalities and nine municipal districts in the province.
Population.
In 2002 (last national census), there were 91,480 people living in the Baoruco province, and 49,530 (54.1%) living in towns and cities. The population density was 71.3 persons/km².
The largest city of the province is Neiba, its head municipality or capital, with a population (in 2002) of 25,420 inhabitants.
Geography.
The Baoruco province is located in the "Hoya de Enriquillo" valley, a very dry valley with some parts below sea level; its capital, Neiba, has an elevation of 10 m below sea level. In this valley is the "Lake Enriquillo", and the northeastern part of the lake belongs to the Baoruco province.
The Sierra de Neiba runs across the northern part of the province, on the border with the San Juan province.
The most important river in the province is the Yaque del Sur River, one of the longest in the country; it forms the eastern limit of the province and its water is used for irrigation.
The climate of the province is a tropical climate, very hot and dry in the valley, but it is cooler on the mountains.
Economy.
The main economic activity of the province is agriculture and the main products are plantain in Tamayo, grape in Neiba and Los Ríos. On the Sierra de Neiba, coffee and beans are important products.
