The Bethlehem Housing Authority (BHA)provides social housing in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
Early years.
The Bethlehem Housing Authority was formed in 1939. Its job was to build houses for the people living in Bethlehem, which is a city in eastern Pennsylvania.
The National Housing Act (1937) was one of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt's first tries to make better the living conditions of Americans badly affected by the Great Depression of the 1930's.
Bethlehem's Housing Authority was one of the first in the nation. Robert Nuemeyer became the Authority's first executive director in 1939. BHA's first board consisted of chairman (and mayor) Robert Pfeifle, Weir Jepson, Merritt Kreidler, Lt. Colonel William Coyle and Andrew W. Litzenberger.
The first thing the BHA built was "low-income public housing". That means the houses were built for people who did not earn a lot of money, and they were not built to be sold to make money. The new houses were called Pembroke Village. They were on reclaimed farmland in the northeast part of the city. This area was near the border with the boroughs of Freemansburg, Steel City and Bethlehem Township.
Pembroke Village was planned to have 202 houses or apartments, and a community building/office. At about this time, the US entered into World War II. The war meant there was very little building in the US. But Bethlehem Steel's factory was more or less turned over completely toward providing goods for the war effort. Thousands of workers were brought into Bethlehem to help the plant work for 24 hours a day. This meant a lot of houses were needed in the city. The government and the housing authority got extra land and built three communities as "temporary war housing". 700 homes for these workers were built at Parkridge, South Terrace and Clearfield. Pembroke Village was hurried to completion and its 202 units were set aside as "permanent war housing", meaning that at the end of the war, Pembroke would revert to (go back to being) low-income housing, while the others would be demolished.
After the War.
After the end of WWII, Bethlehem had another housing crisis. Men were leaving the armed forces and going back home. From about the start of 1946, the population of the United States increased greatly. In Bethlehem the city population increased from 50,000 to 75,000 by 1960.
This meant that a lot of affordable housing was needed. The BHA decided to keep the Parkridge, South Terrace and Clearfield units and use them as public housing.
The BHA also planned to build another 500 - 600 units next to Pembroke on a former family farm along Pembroke Road. These buildings would increase Bethlehem's public housing stock to more than 1,400 units.
By June of 1950, firms had offered to build Fairmount for $962,000.00. By the end of the year, the Marvine Village bid was also approved for $3.9 million. A lot of the Fairmount project was paid for by the State of Pennsylvania. It stayed part of the state's housing inventory until the late 1970's.
By 1952, Mr. Nuemeyer became ill and stepped down. He was replaced by Ralph J. Bartholomew, who was a longtime member of the banking community. During Mr. Bartholomew's tenure, the housing authority started an expansion program designed to help the growing needs of the elderly population.
1960 - 1974.
In 1962, BHA showed plans for its first development designed for older people. The "Robert Pfeifle Homes", was a 50 unit community located in the northeast area. It had ten buildings.
They were among the very first of their type in the United States. In the next ten years, the BHA would design and build more public housing for seniors, including the "Litzenberger House", the "Bodder Building" and the "Bartholomew Building" and the "Monocacy Tower".
The BHA now has some 450 apartments now exist to serve the older adults in need of affordable housing.
At around this time, Mr. Bartholomew passed away and his successor was brought in from the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Frank V. Loretti, with a background in labor relations became the BHA's third director.
1974 - 2003.
Frank Loretti's wanted to modernize the way the authority worked and was organized. He wanted to use computers for the authority's records and other functions.
During this time each development was modernized inside and out. Also the South Terrace, Parkridge and Clearfield projects were knocked down. South Terrace and Parkridge were rebuilt between 1985 and 1991 and all other buildings were improved.
Also during this period, various management functions were centralized for greater organization and efficiency. The maintenance shops were also centralized within one modern facility in 1978.
Today.
The current executive director is Clara A. Kendy (2004). The Bethlehem Housing Authority does not have so much money from the federal government. HUD says agencies must "do more with less".
Today, BHA has several new ideas, including homeownership initiatives where the authority connects eligible tenants with opportunities to help them own their own home. One such example is a partnership with Habitat For Humanity.
Today, the Bethlehem Housing Authority manages 1,430 housing units within ten developments serving the city of Bethlehem. The authority also has various recreational and social programs for tenants of all ages.
In 2007, BHA's new First Tee Golf Learning program received a national merit award, recognizing it as an innovative recreation/learning program for children. In 2009, BHA will celebrate 70 years of service to the community.
