The Cassowaries (genus "Casuarius") are a group of large birds that are not able to fly. They are part of a group called ratite birds. The ostrich, emu, moa (now extinct) and small kiwi are other ratite birds. The ratite birds were some of the first types of birds to develop. The cassowary lives in the tropical rainforests of New Guinea and north eastern Australia. They are shy birds living deep in the forest. They can also become angry and will attack people. This makes it hard to learn about them.
Description.
The Southern Cassowary is the largest land animal in Australia and the second heaviest bird in the world after the ostrich. It is third tallest after the ostrich and emu. Females are bigger and more brightly coloured. Adult Southern Cassowaries are 1.5 to 1.8 m (5 to 6 feet) tall, but some females may get as big as 2 m (6 feet 8 inches), and weigh about 70 kilograms (154 pounds).. They do not have feathers on their necks. The necks are brightly colored in red, blue, purple and yellow. The Southern Cassowary has 2 wattles, loose skin, which hangs down from their neck. The Northern Cassowary has 1 wattle. The Dwarf Cassowary has no wattles.
Cassowary's have 3 toes on each foot. Each has a sharp claw. The middle toe has a claw like a dagger, which is 120 mm (5 inches) long. This claw is very dangerous since the Cassowary can kick and hurt or kill enemies. They can run up to 50 h (32 mph) through the thick forest. They can jump up to 1.5 m (5 feet) and they can swim. There have been reported attacks on people and animals by cassowaries. In April 1926, a cassowary killed a 16 year old boy near Mossman, Queensland.
The cassowary's wings are very small, as they are not meant to fly. Their feathers are different to other birds, and also not designed for flying.
Breeding.
Females lay 3 to 8 large, pale green-blue eggs at a time. These large eggs are about 9 cm by 14 cm (3½ by 5½ inches) and weigh about 600 grams. Ostrich and emu eggs are bigger. The male sits on the eggs for 2 months until they hatch. He then looks after the brown-striped chicks for 9 months. The female mates with 2 or 3 males each year. One cassowary, at the Healesville Sanctuary, lived for 61 years.
The casque.
Biologist Andrew Mack has watched cassowaries and disagreed with many of these ideas. " He thinks that the casques play a part in the way cassowaries hear sounds or the way that they make sounds. He discovered that the Dwarf Cassowary and Southern Cassowary make a very low sound. It is the lowest known bird call, like a "boom", which people can only just hear. The birds live by themselves, they do not live in groups so the "booming sound" might be a way for the birds to communicate (talk) over a long distance in thick rainforest. Scientists think that this way of talking may be how dinosaurs communicated with each other.
What they eat.
File:Kasuar fg1.jpg|thumb|a>) showing all the seeds
Their main food is fruit, but they eat other things such as snails, fungi, ferns and flowers. They are important because they spread plant and fruit seeds through the forest. Each cassowary is known to live in an area of up to, so they carry seeds a long way. At least 70 rainforest trees need the cassowary to spread their seeds. Their seeds are too big for other rainforest animals to carry. Seeds from 21 plants have to be eaten and pass through the cassowary or they will not grow. Some seeds are poisonous to all other animals; only the cassowary can eat them. Scientists have worked out that about 150 rainforest plants need the cassowary.
Endangered species.
File:Cassowary road sign.jpg|thumb|Road sign to protect cassowaries
The Southern Cassowary is now listed as endangered in Australia. Scientists think there are only between 1200 and 1500 cassowaries left in Australia. Many of the forest places that they like to live in have been cleared for farming and other development. It has been worked out that 75% of rainforest, where cassowaries used to live, have been cleared in Australia. When Cyclone Larry hit the Mission Beach area in 2006 a lot of cassowary forest was flattened. It is thought that 18% of the birds were killed by the storm. Animals such as wild pigs, dogs and cats, have become a big threat to the birds. Motor cars are a big danger to the birds. Scientists say that 70% of known cassowary deaths at Mission Beach, Queensland, were birds killed trying to cross roads.
The Northern Cassowary in New Guinea is listed as vulnerable. They could easily become an endangered animal unless things are done to protect them. Scientists don't know how many birds there are, but the think it is between 2,500 and 9,999.
Saving the cassowary.
The CSIRO are studying cassowary faeces to see if they can use their DNA to count how many birds are left. In 2008, the Australian Government stopped rainforest land being used to build houses at Mission Beach. They are going to try and keep corridors (narrow forest areas) so the birds can move between rainforest areas safely. People will be asked to replant forest trees and plants on their land to help make these corridors. The government is looking at buying land for more corridors. Scientists are finding out when and where cassowaries cross roads. This will mean strict limits on motor car speeds to protect cassowaries that might try to cross some roads. Plans are being looked at to build raised roads so the birds can pass underneath.
Many zoos, such as the Australian Reptile Park in Gosford, the Airlie Beach Wildlife Park and the Denver Zoo are trying to breed cassowaries. Cassowaries in zoos have lived for up to 60 years. The first cassowary kept in a zoo was in Amsterdam in 1597. It had been brought back as a present for the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II..
Cassowaries in art and music.
In 2007, Australian singer Christine Anu, made an album called Chrissy's Island Family. This is a collection of songs for children. One of the songs is called "Cassowary". It is about Samu, the Wakka Woo Cassowary. There is a childrens picture book called "Sisi and the Cassowary", by Arone Raymond Meeks. It has drawings in traditional aboriginal style to tell a Dreamtime like story.
English natural history writer and artist, John Gould, had drawings of the cassowary in his set of 7 books called "The Birds of Australia". These were printed in London between 1851 and 1869. The cassowary drawings were completed by Henry Richter (b. 1821 - d. 1902). Richter's watercolor painting of the cassowary is in the museum in Melbourne, Victoria.
