Cannabis (pronounced) (also called Cannabis Sativa, Cannabis Indica, or Marijuana) is a plant. The cannabis plant's leaves and flowers have a chemical or drug known as THC (short for "tetra-hydro-cannabinol") that gives a person who smokes or eats the plant a feeling of euphoria (it makes the user feel good or happy). Marijuana is the most commonly used illegal drug in the United States.
Types of cannabis.
The two main types of cannabis used as a drug are marijuana and hashish.
Is cannabis legal?
It is illegal (against the law) for people to have cannabis in most countries.
Cannabis is not legal in the Netherlands, but there are no criminal laws against having a small amount of cannabis, because the Netherlands has decided that having cannabis should not be a crime. Some other countries are starting to decriminalize marijuana as well (make using it a violation, not a crime).
In some countries, including Canada, there are some people with serious diseases granted permission by the government to possess and smoke marijuana. Their illnesses are varied, but tend to have something in common; they have negative symptoms or side-effects of the illness or of the treatment they are receiving. Medicine or other treatment they are receiving, such chemotherapy against cancer, can cause nausea, reduced appetite or other bad effects.
Since marijuana has been shown to reduce nausea as well as increase appetite, some patients smoke it regularly - even if they have to obtain it illegally. Patients who are granted permission by the government to buy or possess marijuana for medicinal purposes still have restrictions. For example, the person can only possess a small quantity of marijuana, and they are not allowed to sell or give it to other people.
Cannabis as a legal drug.
Cannabis has been recommended by doctors for a very long time. It can be used to treat anorexia. It may also be used to stop nausea related to chemotherapy. Chemotherapy is used to treat cancer. It also acts like an analgesic, and can be used to relieve pain. It can also help treating spasms, as they occur with epilepsy.
Effects.
When a person breathes in the marijuana smoke or eats it, he or she gets a feeling called "getting high" or "getting stoned". The most common effects of the drug include feeling happy, feeling relaxed, feeling silly, feeling scared, or not being able to think clearly (or not being able to remember anything at all), and getting hungry. Smoking marijuana also changes how people think and feel, and this can make it either harder or easier to solve some problems. Some people who take marijuana feel strange or paranoid (worried that something bad is going to happen).
When people smoke or eat cannabis, they often get hungry, because cannabis increases a person's appetite. The slang term for this effect is "the munchies".
Since hashish is much stronger than marijuana (dried cannabis leaves and flowers), people who take large amounts of hashish may feel even stronger effects. They may also hear strange sounds, or have strange visions or thoughts called hallucinations. Some hashish users like the feeling of these visions and thoughts. Others may find them scary. However, having hallucinations after smoking or ingesting cannabis is very rare.
Dangers of using cannabis.
Marijuana is one of the least dangerous illegal drugs that are commonly used. Unlike Alcohol, heroin, Crystal Meth, cocaine, or crack, it is impossible for a person to die from an overdose (too much) of marijuana or hashish. However, a person who is intoxicated ("high" or "stoned") from marijuana could get hurt or killed if they drive a car, boat, or train while they are intoxicated and have an accident.
Smoking any drugs such as marijuana, hashish, or tobacco is bad for the lungs, because the smoke has carbon monoxide in it, and contains other chemicals that can cause cancer in the lungs, throat or mouth.
"Hard drugs", such as heroin, crack, and cocaine are chemically addictive. This means that if a person starts taking heroin, crack, or cocaine, that persons body will physicaly need to keep taking the drug, to discontinue use may cause them to become sick. Marijuana and hashish is not "chemicaly" addictive, but as with any thing else, it can be "psychologically" or habitually addictive, meaning people can get so used to it, they feel as if they need it. Unlike with alcohol, tobacco, and hard drugs (heroin, crack, etc.), people who use marijuana can stop taking it when they want, without going through physical withdrawal symptoms.
As well, some people who use a lot of marijuana or hashish every day may start feeling less motivated about life. A person who uses a lot of marijuana or hashish every day may have less interest in going to school or going to work. They may also have less interest in seeing their friends or family, or doing activities or hobbies that they used to enjoy. The fact is too much of anything can be bad for you. Even vitamin C can become addictive in too large of a quantity as well as coffee for that matter.
Some studies showed that people who had used cannabis had a higher risk of developing mental illnesses, like Schizophrenia. Cannabis can not develop schizophrenia, but it may trigger it for those who are prone.
History.
Marijuana was grown in plantations (very big farms) in the eastern United States from around 1775 to the mid 1860s. When the plantations disappeared by 1870, marijuana grew wild along the east coast and New England.
Like many plants with a lot of fibre in them, cannabis can be used to make clothes, rope, and paper. When grown for these purposes it is often called "hemp" or "industrial hemp". Cannabis that is used for making rope or paper has a very low amount of the chemical THC in it. You cannot get "high" from hemp rope or paper, because there is almost no THC drug in it. In the early 1900s, most rope used to be made from hemp. During World War II, the United States government made a movie to get farmers to grow more hemp so that there would be enough to make rope and cloth for the war effort. This movie was called "Hemp For Victory".
