"Calvin and Hobbes" is a comic strip made by Bill Watterson about a boy called Calvin and a stuffed tiger called Hobbes that Calvin thinks is a real tiger. It first appeared in 1985, and Calvin has been printed by over 2,400 newspapers. Almost 23 million Calvin and Hobbes books have been printed.
In the comic, Calvin goes everywhere with Hobbes. In panels with only Calvin and Hobbes in them, Hobbes looks like a cartoon tiger, standing on two legs. In panels with any other person, he looks like a stuffed animal. Bill Watterson says that it can be either, and readers can decide which is real. In the first strip, Calvin meets Hobbes when he catches him with a rope baited with a tuna fish sandwich. Calvin and Hobbes run into all sorts of trouble and adventures. The comic strip ran from November 18, 1985 until December 31, 1995.
Calvin's alter-egos.
On many occasions, Calvin sees himself in one of his many alternate guises: as the superhero Stupendous Man, the astronaut and explorer Spaceman Spiff, the private eye Tracer Bullet, and many others. This is like comparing Calvin's imagininary worlds to the real world in the strip, and it guides him through fun and adventure.
Hobbes.
In classic comic tradition of sidekicks, Hobbes is kind of like Calvin's 'good side' because he is more mature and makes smarter decisions than Calvin does. When Calvin does something like throw a snowball at a girl, Hobbes will say "You think she's cute, right?" This kind of teaches Calvin a lesson and it makes the comic seem better.
From most characters' point of view, Hobbes is Calvin's stuffed tiger. However, from Calvin's point of view, Hobbes is as alive and real as anyone in the strip. He is named after 17th century philosopher Thomas Hobbes, who had what Watterson said "a dim view of human nature." Hobbes is much more alert and aware of the bad things that can happen than Calvin is aware, but he does not stop Calvin's trouble making. All that he really does is warn him, and anyways, Calvin will be the one to get in trouble for it, not Hobbes. Hobbes also has the habit of sneaking up and then jumping on Calvin, which Calvin hates.
Although the first strips clearly show Calvin capturing Hobbes by means of a trap (with tuna fish as the bait), a later comic (1 August 1989) seems to imply that Hobbes is, in fact, older than Calvin, and has been around with him his whole life. Watterson decided that it was not important to explain how Calvin and Hobbes had first met.
Calvin's family.
Calvin's mom and dad are for the most part regular Middle American middle-class parents; like many other characters in the strip, their relatively realistic and sensible manners act as mainly as a foil for Calvin's childish and selfish behavior. Both parents go through the entire strip unnamed, except as "Mom" and "Dad", or such nicknames as "hon" and "dear." Watterson has never given Calvin's parents names "because as far as the strip is concerned, they are important only as Calvin's mom and dad." This ended up being somewhat problematic when Calvin's Uncle Max was in the strip for a week and couldn't refer to the parents by name, and was one of the main reasons that Max never reappeared.
Susie Derkins.
Susie Derkins, the only character in the strip with both first and last names, is a fellow classmate of Calvin who lives in his neighborhood. She first appeared early in the strip as a new student in Calvin's class. Unlike Calvin, she is polite and very smart and eager to improve in her studies and grades at school, and her imagination usually seems mild-mannered and calm, consisting of a standard young girls' games such as playing house or having tea parties with her stuffed animals. Her approach to these games is arguably more modern, however, some might say even skeptical. (In a game of "house" she usually casts herself as the traditional working wife while Calvin is the lousy and useless husband or some version similar to that.) "Derkins" was the nickname of Watterson's wife's family beagle, and he liked the name so much he named this character after it. As much as either of them hate to admit, Calvin and Susie have quite a bit in common. (Susie is shown on occasion with a stuffed rabbit known as "Mr. Bun," and Calvin always has Hobbes.)
Watterson admits that Calvin and Susie have a bit of a wild crush on each other (Said by Calvin, "It's shameless the way we flirt."), and that Susie is inspired by the type of women Watterson himself finds attractive (which has led to speculation that Susie is based on Watterson's wife). Her relationship with Calvin, though, is frequently conflicted, and never really becomes sorted out, and the closest things are times when Calvin sends dead flowers and hate-mail as Valentine's Day gifts for his own enjoyment. (She feels he likes her enough to send her that gift, and he rejoices in her noticing.)
On occasion, Hobbes takes action to attract Susie's romantic attention, often with success, and much to Calvin's anger and jealousy. Although on the surface these events take the form of Hobbes teasing Calvin and showing off his charms, they may be Calvin's way to disguise his own crush on Susie, by pretending that it is Hobbes' crush instead.
Moe.
Moe is the traditional bully character in "Calvin & Hobbes", "a six-year-old who shaves" who is always pushing Calvin against walls, forcing to give him to give away his lunch money, and calling him "Twinky." Moe is the only regular character who speaks in an unusual font: his (frequently monosyllabic) dialogue is shown in rough, lower-case letters. Watterson describes Moe as "every jerk I've ever known." And while Moe is not smart, he is, as Calvin puts it, streetwise. "That means he knows what street he lives on."
Miss Wormwood.
Miss Wormwood is Calvin's bored and depressed teacher, named after the apprentice devil in C.S. Lewis's "The Screwtape Letters". She continuously wears polka-dotted dresses, and serves like others as a foil to Calvin's rude behavior. Calvin's response to the boring studies of schoolwork is endless dreams of his imagination. She is eagerly waiting to retire, taking a large amount of medication, and is apparently a heavy smoker and alcoholic drinker.
Although there is a definite progression of time in the Calvin and Hobbes universe, mainly exhibited by the changing seasons, Calvin (and Susie) returns to Ms. Wormwood's first-grade class every fall.
As usual, for an adult entering Calvin's world, Miss Wormwood sees it differently from Calvin. When she confronts Calvin regarding missing homework, for example, Calvin's Spaceman Spiff persona perceives a large slimy threatening snarling alien. "Slowly, carefully, Spiff draws his death-ray blaster".
Rosalyn.
Rosalyn is a teenage high school senior student and the person who watches Calvin, whenever Calvin's parents go on a night out together. She is the only babysitter able to put up with Calvin's bad behavior, which she uses to demand raises and advances from Calvin's desperate parents. She is also, according to Watterson, the only person Calvin truly fears— certainly she is his equal in sneakiness, and doesn't pause to play as dirty as he does. Rosalyn was known to have a habit of sending him to bed at 6:30 which he goes against and only makes more trouble. Rosalyn's boyfriend, Charlie, never appears in the strip but calls her occasionally. These calls are often cut short by Calvin. Originally she was created as a nameless, one-shot character with no plans to appear again; however, Watterson decided he wanted to keep her unique ability to scare Calvin, which and ultimately, led to many more appearances.
At one time during the strip shown in the book collection "The Revenge of the Babysat", Calvin's parents prepare to go out on a night with a dinner and a movie while leaving Calvin with Rosalyn. In freight of the news, he runs up to Hobbes and explains the situation. Later when Rosalyn appears, Calvin and Hobbes over hear Rosalyn needing to study for a big science test which they plan to sabotage. After Calvin's parents leave, Calvin approaches Rosalyn, curious of what she's doing. After slyly talking her away from her science notes, he quickly grabs them, runs to the bathroom door with Hobbes, and locks the door while Rosalyn yells from he outside demanding her notes back. Once they "flushed" her notes (in which they only pretended to and flushed an empty toilet). Moments later when the wonder if Rosalyn has gone, Calvin opens the door only to find Rosalyn pounce upon him and throw him to bed at 7 o'clock which Hobbes notes that they went to bed 30 minutes later than usual. The ending shows Calvin's parents coming back home to find Rosalyn charge extra money for the job while Calvin's parents argue if there's another babysitter in town.
Snowballs and snowmen.
During the winter time, Calvin was often seen making ugly or frightening types of snowmen when once Calvin created the "Deranged Mutant Killer Monster Snow Goons". Also his snowmen creations had snowmen with missing or multiple heads, snowmen taking another's head for a bowling ball, and snowmen being "knocked over" by his family's car.
Also Calvin frequently threw snowballs at Susie, most likely having himself being chased by Susie. Once Calvin (while in his "Stupendous Man" alter-ego) also made a gigantic snowball and dropped it at Susie while on top of a tree, as where Susie's mom described it as a "the size of a bowling ball".
Monsters under the bed.
The monsters under the bed were described as scary, octopus-tentacled shaped creatures that lived under Calvin's bed every time he went to sleep. Often they would try to bribe Calvin to come under the bed by giving him a new toy or by urging Hobbes to push Calvin over in return for a fresh piece of salmon. According to Calvin he'd usually describe them as "all fangs and no brains". They often lie to Calvin when he asks "how many monsters are under my bed?, when they'd usually reply there's "only one" or "none and go to sleep". Although various monsters were known to exist under Calvin's bed, two named monsters "Maurice" and "Winslow" appeared and re-appeared during the strip's middle times.
G.R.O.S.S..
Get Rid Of Slimy Girls is Calvin's anti-girl club in which the club's goal is to annoy and bother girls, particularly Calvin's main target, Susie Derkins. The club has only two members, Calvin and Hobbes which Calvin takes role as "supreme dicator-for-life" and Hobbes being the "first tiger". There, the two usually plot on throwing water balloons or snowballs on her which sometimes end up with a flawed ending. Nonetheless, according to Calvin, every time they finish a mission or meeting, they always award medals, honors, and promotions.
School and homework.
Calvin hates school and homework as much as anything he says and usually tries to slip out from both of them. He struggles against his mom from catching the school bus, and would sometimes attempt to ditch the class and run home. At one Sunday strip, Calvin's imagination became so wild and vivid that he imagined getting in a F-15 Eagle warcraft and blasting his elementary school to pieces with a number of missiles.
