Crich Tramway Village, home of the National Tramway Museum, is a museum that is completly outside about trams and tramways. It is in Crich, (), Derbyshire, England. The museum is set up as an Edwardian village. It has tram lines going out about into the area surrounding the village. The village street contains a sweet shop, cafe and gift shop, as well as the front of the original Derby Assembly Rooms, the whole Red Lion Pub from Stoke, and the tram sheds and displays. There is also street furniture from around the United Kingdom.
Most of the trams at Crich ran along the streets of cities in United Kingdom before the 1960s, although some are from abroad. Many were rescued and restored when the tram services in the cities stopped.
History of the museum.
Most tram networks in Britain had closed by 1962, but a few did not. The tramway in Blackpool was one system that stayed open, and still runs today. In the early 1990s the government decided that trams were a way of stopping the congestion problems that were growing in the UK. New light rail systems, or "second generation tramways", opened in cities such as Manchester, Sheffield and Nottingham, and there are more being built.
The tramway at the museum follows the route of part of an old railway. The old railway was built to link the quarry at Crich with Ambergate, a nearby village. The original track was built by a great Victorian railway engineer, George Stephenson.
When Stephenson was building the North Midland Railway from Derby to Rotheram and Leeds he found a large amount of coal buried under the ground near to Clay Cross. He saw an oppurtunity to quarry it and make some money. Crich was already on the mining map for the quality of the limestone that was being mined there. Stephenson realised he could use this limestone and coal to make burnt lime for agricultural use and then his railway to transport it. The museum was built on part of the old Cliff Quarry, which was bought by Stephenson's company and to link it to the limekilns at Ambergate a new metre guage railway was built, which sources claim is the first in the world.
After the Second World War most British Tramways were closing or in decline. It was then that the first event in the history of the museum took place. A group of enthusiasts decided to buy an open top tram that they had ridden on at the farewell tour of Southampton Tramways. For just £ 10 they bought number 45, which is now the icon of British tramway preservation. At this time there were no working museums or heritage railways - they were often full of glass cases - and so the idea of amateurs running a tramway or railway came across as being impossible. But the small group went on with their ideas, and in 1955 the Tramway Museum Society was formed. It became a company limited by guarantee in 1962 and a year later it was listed as an educational charity. Since then, the Society has grown with men and women from all over the world and of all age group helping to make the tramway musuem.
In 1959, the Society found its location, after a very long search all over the country. The site was found by the Talyllyn Railway Preservation Society when they were removing the old track from Stephenson's mineral railway for their project in Wales to preserve a narrow guage railway. After the Tramway Museum Society's members had a tour of the quarry they bought part of the site and buildings. Over the years the society's members helped to get a large collection of tramcars from all over the world, as well as track and electrical equipment amongst other things. Many of the tramcars were also restored to a working condition. In 1967 the society decided that they would develop a village around the tramway, as trams didn't run in limestone quarries, and so the idea of Crich Tramway Village appeared. Many items of street furniture and even complete buildings were acquired, which were then changed to house the Museum's collections of books, photographs and archives.
The museum was one of the first 26 museums to be designated because of the outstanding nature of their collections by the Secretary of State for Culture, the Media and Sport in 1995.
Since the start of the 2000s, the work of the museum's volunteers and the income earned by visitors has been added to by grants from the Heritage Lottery Fund, the Designation Challenge Fund of the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council and the DEFRA Aggregates Levy Sustainability Fund. The museum remains an independant charity though, and this means that it receives no core funding from the state of local government.
Tramcar fleet.
The museum has over 60 tramcars from locations such as Berlin, Blackpool, Chesterfield, Den Haag, Derby, Douglas, Dundee, Edinburgh, Gateshead, Glasgow, Grimsby, Halle, Howth, Johannesburg, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, New York, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Oporto, Paisley, Prague, Sheffield, Southampton and Sydney.
Most of these tramcars are double-deckers and some also have open-tops.
The Museum has about nineteen tramcars that are in a fully-working condition. Every day that the museum is open two to four of those trams are used in service on the mile long line. There is also a 1969 Berlin Tram that has been changed into an "Access Tram". This lets less able visitors have a ride on the line at the museum.
Many of the trams can be seen at the museum, but some are in store at Clay Cross. Such examples are Blackpool Dreadnought 59 and Blackpool OMO 5.
Methods of tramcar operation.
The Museum has three main forms of tramcar operation, but only one is ordinarily used. That is electricity. Other forms are horse trams (shown with Chesterfield 8, Oporto 9 and Sheffield 15) and steam power (the John Bull Steam Locomotive and Dundee 21, the trailer car).
The museum's overhead wire system is one of a kind. Most systems are built to operate with just one form of current collector, but the museum's has been built so that any can be used - including trolley poles, bow collectors and pantographs. Other forms of electric current collection that are demonstrated are the stud contact system, as demonstrated with a dummy stud between the rails in the yard, the only known example of this form remaining from Wolverhampton, and the plough-and-trough system, used in Blackpool and demonstrated by Blackpool 4.
