The combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) often shortened to birth-control pill or simply the pill is a contraceptive for women. The pills contain hormones that make the women who take them infertile. Women who take the pill will not become pregnant during sexual intercourse, they won't have babies if they do not want to. When the women stop taking the pills, they will usually become fertile again. When taken as prescribed, the pills are one of the safest means of contraception. Women who take the pill will not become pregnant during sexual intercourse; they won't have babies if they do not want to.
In the 1950s the hormone progesterone was discovered to stop women from making eggs (stopped ovulation). The combined oral contraceptive pill was developed following this find. The combined oral contraceptive pill has both female hormones estrogen and progesterone. Some oral contraceptive pills have only progesterone. These are often known as the "minipill".
The combined oral contraceptive pill is considered safe and working.
The contraceptive method was brought out in the United States in 1960. The pills are a very popular form of birth control today. Different pills exist which are mainly different in the kinds of hormones they use.
In 2005 more than 80 million women worldwide used the pill. It is the most commonly used method of contraception in the United States. Usage varies widely by country, age, education, and marital status.
Different countries use different contraceptives.
The choice of contraception and whether or not it is available varies by country. One quarter of women aged 16–49 in United Kingdom were using the Pill as at 2006 (combined pill or progestogen only pill ("minipill")), compared to only 1% of women in Japan.
Whether or not people use the pill may also be influenced by local culture and habits.
In some countries women do not really have a choice. If they want to use contraception, they must rely on one type of contraception. In some countries (such as Algeria, Morocco, and Zimbabwe) the pill is the most common method offered by national family planning programs. In other countries, national family planning programs offer only female sterilization (India) or only the IUD, intrauterine device (Egypt and Vietnam).
Different kinds of pills.
There are different kinds of COCPs. There are two main kinds of pills, those that contain both estrogen and progesterone, or those that contain progesterone only. Note that the pills do not contain the hormones themselves, but other chemical substances that are very similar, but that have been made in the laboratory. Estrogen stops the breast from producing milk; Women who are breastfeeding should therefore not be given pills that have estrogen in them. There are a few other coditions, where women should not be given estrogen. These women can use the progesterone-only pills.
There are pills where the concentration of the hormones change from week to week. Also the levels of hormones are different in different kinds of pills. The same pill may exist with different levels of hormones.
Effectiveness.
Rates are generally presented for the first year of use. Most commonly the Pearl Index is used to calculate effectiveness rates, but some studies use decrement tables.
The typical use pregnancy rate among COCP users varies depending on the population being studied. It is between 2 % and 8% per year. The perfect use pregnancy rate of COCPs is 0.3% per year.
People might have been given wrong information as to how often the pill should be taken, or they might have forgotten to take a pill once, or they might not have bothered to go to the pharmacy to get new pills.
COCPs can provide effective contaception, if the first pill is taken no later than 5 days after the start of menstruation. If the treatment is started at any other time in the menstrual cycle, COCPs cannot provide a safe means of contraception for the first 7 days of use. During this time, other forms of contraception need to be used. When active pills have been taken for 7 days,COCPs can provide effective contaception. COCPs should be taken at approximately the same time every day.
Problems with other drugs.
Broad spectrum antibiotics, such as ampicillin and doxycycline, may cause problems "by impairing the bacterial flora responsible for recycling ethinylestradiol from the large bowel" (BNF 2003).
The traditional medicinal herb St John's Wort has also been implicated due to its upregulation of the P450 system in the liver.
Non-contraceptive uses.
The pill can also induce menstruation on a regular schedule for women bothered by irregular menstrual cycles and certain disorders where there is dysfunctional uterine bleeding.
Women who use combined oral contraceptives have a lesser risk of getting cancer of the ovaries. The risk can be reduced by half if the pill is taken for five years. Taking the pill also significantly reduces the risk of endometrial cancer by half compared to women who have never taken the pill. The risk reduction increases with duration of use. However, by taking the pill, the risk of cancer of the risk of breast and cancer of the cervix is increased.
