Chocolate is a flavoring made from the seeds of a cacao tree. It is used in many desserts like pudding, cakes, candy, and ice cream. It can be in a solid form, often as a candy bar. The liquid form would be in a drink like hot chocolate.
Types of chocolate.
There are three main kinds of chocolate: white chocolate, milk chocolate, and dark chocolate. There is also plain chocolate.White chocolate tastes much sweeter than the other two types, because it has more of the sweeter ingredients in it. White chocolate has little cocoa in it. It is mostly made of cocoa butter. Milk chocolate is sweet, but not as sweet as white chocolate. Milk chocolate has some cocoa. Dark chocolate is the strongest, with up to 80-85 percent cocoa (Which is really bitter). Chocolate can also have lots of different flavourings like orange
Safety.
Chocolate is safe to eat, if it is not eaten in large amounts. Some people eat it every day. Some animals and some people cannot eat chocolate because they get sick. Some examples are dogs, and people with diabetes.
Making chocolate.
Making chocolate is a process that has many steps. First, the cacao beans are collected and put in piles or containers to make them ferment, or to make the sugar in the beans turn into alcohol. Then the beans are dried and cleaned. Chocolate makers must cook the beans, and then crush them to make the cocoa butter and the chocolate liquor come out of them. Then the chocolate maker puts together different amounts of certain ingredients to make the different kinds of chocolate. Dark or bittersweet chocolate is made from sugar, cocoa butter, and chocolate liquor. Milk chocolate uses all of those ingredients plus milk and vanilla. White chocolate does not contain chocolate liquor, but only cocoa butter, along with sugar, milk and vanilla. After these ingredients are put together, the chocolate maker is still not finished. One of the last things to be done is something called conching. Before chocolate is conched, it feels very rough in the mouth, instead of smooth. Conching means crushing the chocolate very finely and keeping it warm so that it is liquid. Conching should be done for at least several hours in order to make good chocolate. The last step in making chocolate is called tempering. The chocolate is heated, and then shaken, and then cooled a few times.
Ingredients.
There are a number of active ingredients in chocolate. The most notable of these are caffeine and theobromine. These two closely related chemicals are found in all cocoa beans to a greater or lesser degree depending on the genetics of the tree and the stresses placed on the tree during the growing season.
History of chocolate.
The cacao tree was first found to be useful for its seeds about two thousand years ago. Early Central Americans and Mexicans used the seeds from the cacao tree to make a drink that tasted bitter, not sweet. Only the important people could drink it. The common, average people could not. The word for "chocolate" in almost every language comes its name in the Nahuatl language of Mexico, "chocolatl".
Later on, this drink was made sweeter and made into the treat that is known today as hot chocolate. It was made popular by Spanish explorers who brought it back from North America to Spain. When chocolate was sweetened and made into candy, it became a very popular treat for many Europeans. At first, only the rich could afford chocolate, but now, many people enjoy it. Cacao trees grow in the tropics, and most cocoa today is made in Africa. Though some is made in India
