is a role-playing video game made by Square Soft for the Super NES game console.
Summary.
"Chrono Trigger" is about a boy named Crono who goes to an event called the Millennium Fair to celebrate that it was now the year 1000 AD, and meets a strange girl named Marle. After going around the fair with her for a while, they go to a showing of his friend Lucca's teleportation machine. After Marle tries it, her pendant starts to shine, and she gets sucked into a portal without her pendant. Crono picks it up and has Lucca turn her machine on so he can go into the portal to save her. Crono appears in a strange place and is attacked by goblins. He goes to a town and finds out that he's in the year 600 AD. He goes to the castle and sees Marle in a dress, because when she was found, the knights thought she was their Queen Leene who had gone missing. He learns that she's actually Princess Nadia, a Princess in 1000 AD, but soon after, she disappears. Crono runs into Lucca who came back to the past, and she explains that Queen Leene is Marle's ancestor, and because they thought Marle was Queen Leene, Queen Leene's search ended, and she was never found, so all of her descendants including Marle disappeared. Crono and Lucca have to go find Queen Leene, and go to a church. They find out that it's actually a lair for monsters, and join with a knight who looks like a frog called Frog to find the Queen. They go deeper into the church and run into the Chancellor, who was actually a monster called Yakra. After they defeat him, they rescue Queen Leene and the Chancellor, and Marle returns. Frog leaves the castle in shame, and Crono, Marle, and Lucca return to the present.
Gameplay.
"Chrono Trigger" is a role-playing game. It was one of the first games to let the player see the enemies on the world before they fight them, and when he or she goes into a battle, the enemies and characters fight without going into a separate battle screen like other RPGs like "Final Fantasy" and "Dragon Quest" did at the time.
Reception.
"Chrono Trigger" is thought to be one of the best Super NES games, and one of the best role-playing games too. It got great reviews, praising it for its story, gameplay, and innovation.
Re-releases.
"Chrono Trigger" was first re-released on the PlayStation with "Final Fantasy IV" on "Final Fantasy Chronicles". It got good reviews, but reviewers didn't like the long load times whenever they went into menus or into battle. "Chrono Trigger" will be re-released for the Nintendo DS as "Chrono Trigger DS". It has the same graphics, but will have some new features.
