Christopher J. "Chris" Parks (born October 4, 1973), better known by his ring name Abyss, is an American professional wrestler currently working for TNA.
Ring of Honor (2004 - 2006).
Abyss first appeared in Ring of Honor (ROH) in 2004, being brought in as a bodyguard to the stable Special K. Abyss appeared only once, however, due to Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) pulling all of their contracted talent from ROH.
Abyss returned in the summer of 2005, this time as a member of Prince Nana's heel stable The Embassy as they feuded with Generation Next. The feud between the Embassy and Generation Next lasted through the rest of 2005 with several matches and brawls taking place between both teams. The feud culminated in a Steel Cage Warfare match at December's "Steel Cage Warfare" where Abyss teamed with Alex Shelley, Jimmy Rave and Prince Nana to take on Austin Aries, Roderick Strong, Jack Evans and Matt Sydal. Abyss was eliminated by Jack Evans after a moonsault. In the end, Generation Next won the match and the war.
In January 2006, Abyss teamed with fellow Embassy members Jimmy Rave and Alex Shelley to compete in the Trios Tournament. The Embassy won the tournament, which meant that all three of its winning members earned world title shots. However, Abyss left ROH before he could use the privilege.
Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (2003 - present).
Before Chris Parks was known as Abyss, he was on TNA's first show as Justice. He took part in the Gauntlet For The Gold match to determine a new NWA World Heavyweight Championship|NWA World Heavyweight Champion but lost the match.
Parks returned to TNA as "The Monster" Abyss in June 2003, debuting as a bad guy and attacking Jeff Hardy, although the feud was short lived as Hardy didn't appear to their first match, resulting in a suspension. Afterwards, Parks was brought in as a bodyguard to Kid Kash. They continued to be allies until October, when Kash berated Abyss for losing a match and Abyss turned on and attacked Kash. Abyss gained a victory over Kash, but then lost a First Blood Steel Chair on a Pole match to his former partner. Soon after the loss the feud between the two ended.
Soon after, Abyss aligned himself with Don Callis. With this new alliance, Abyss soon feuded with Raven. The feud lasted for the rest of 2003, with the final match pitting Abyss and the Red Shirt Security (Kevin Northcutt and Legend) against Raven and The Gathering in a Steel Cage match. Abyss and his team came out victorious when the Gathering turned on Raven.
Going into 2004, Abyss entered his first major feud with A.J. Styles. On one show, Abyss was forced to team with Styles in a NWA World Tag Team Championship match against champions Red Shirt Security. Styles and Abyss won the titles, even when Abyss abandoned Styles near the beginning of the match. Abyss defeated Styles in a normal match the following show, and on the next gained control of the titles, defeating Styles in a Four Corners Tables match (Abyss was later stripped of the titles). The following show, both men fought to a no-contest in a Falls Count Anywhere match. The next show, Abyss defeated Styles again, this time in a Ladder match to become the top contender to the NWA World Heavyweight Championship. Abyss lost the right to Raven in a match that also involved Styles and Ron Killings.
About a month after the feud with Styles, Abyss received a new manager, Goldy Locks. She used Abyss to defeat her ex-boyfriend Erik Watts to win his contract. She kept using Abyss to win contracts for her, while also adding Alex Shelley to her group to assist. However, Goldylocks pampered Shelley and treated Abyss poorly. Watts returned for revenge, with Abyss, Shelley, and Goldylocks taking on Watts, Sonny Siaki, and Desire in a Six Person Mixed Tag Team match. During the match, Abyss turned on his team, attacking Goldylocks, and leaving the match and her for good.
Not long after separating from Goldylocks, Abyss began to feud with Monty Brown and Raven. The feud escalated into the first ever Monster's Ball match at TNA's first monthly pay per view, Victory Road. At Victory Road, Brown won the unique match when he pinned Raven. Abyss and Brown continued to feud until they met in a Serengeti Survival match at Turning Point, when Brown again came out victorious. Abyss also happened to take part in an incident at Universal Studios between TNA and World Wrestling Entertainment.
Abyss fought in a Gauntlet For The Gold match at Hard Justice.Abyss won the match and gave himself a spot into the King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary, pitting him against NWA World Heavyweight Champion A.J. Styles, Monty Brown, Raven, and Sean Waltman with the NWA title on the line. Abyss lost to Raven. Abyss got a title match in a Steel Chain Dog Collar match at No Surrender. In the end, Raven pinned Abyss to retain the title.Abyss got another title match at Lockdown in a Six Sides of Steel match against Christian Cage. Christian won but Abyss took the title belt. He wouldn't give it back unless he got another title shot. He did and he lost. Abyss got one more title shot in the King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary. The match also including NWA World Champion Christian Cage, Ron Killings, Jeff Jarrett, and Sting. At the event, Jarrett won the match.
Abyss was in the Fight for the Right Tournament. Abyss won the tournament and the right to face NWA World Champion Sting at Genesis for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship. Abyss faced Sting at the event, and defeated Sting by disqualification.TNA rules say the title can change hands on a disqualification which made Abyss Champion.He lost the title to Christian Cage in a match also involving Sting.On the February 14 edition of "iMPACT!", Abyss was supposed to face Scott Steiner but left the ring before the match but before leaving through the tunnel, Abyss, without showing his face, took off his mask. Abyss returned to action at Slammiversary 2008 after the X Division Championship match wearing a new gray and black mask.
