Computer science is the science of how to treat information. There are many different fields. Some of them look at problems in a more abstract way. Some fields need certain kinds of machines, called computers. A computer scientist will need math, science, and know-how to make and use computers.
Asking a question.
A computer is a device which takes orders as fast as you can give them to it and works as fast as it can to solve the orders.
Asking the right question.
Computers can do some things easily (for example, simple math, or sorting a list of names from A-to-Z). Computers cannot do some things, though. Computers cannot answer questions that do not have enough details, or questions that have no answer. Computers can answer some questions, but may take too much time. As an example, it may take too long to find the shortest way through all the towns in the USA, so every so often a computer scientist will look for a nearly full answer (an approximation). A computer will answer these kind of questions much faster.
Answering the question.
Algorithms have to do with the way computers answer questions. Take playing cards, for example. A computer scientist may want to sort the cards, first by color, and then by order (like 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Jack, Queen, King, and Ace). The computer scientist may see different ways to sort the playing cards. If the way has a detailed account of how to sort the cards, the scientist has made an algorithm. The scientist first needs to test if the algorithm does what it should in all events. The scientist can then see how well it sorts the cards.
A simple, but poor, algorithm would: drop the cards, group them up, and see if they look sorted. If not, do it again. This will work, but will probably take a very long time.
A person may better do this by looking through all the cards, finding the one that goes in the first position (2 of diamonds), and putting it at the start. After this, he looks for the second position, and so on. This works much faster, and does not need as much space.
Computer science left the other sciences near the end of the 20th century and made its own ways of doing things and its own group of word uses. It has to do with electrical engineering, mathematics, and language science.
Computer science looks at the theoretical (not real) parts of computers. Computer engineering looks at the real parts of computers (those that a person could touch), and software engineering looks at the use of computer programs and how to make them.
