CBBC (Children's BBC) is the name of the BBC's television programmes that are for children. It is also the name of a television channel that often shows these programmes. The programmes are meant for children that are between 6 and 12 years old. The "Children's BBC" name began on 9 September 1985. Before then there were BBC children's programmes, but they were not branded under one name. The name "CBBC" was used informally since 1990, and became the official name in 1997.
CBBC programmes are shown on BBC One, BBC Two and the CBBC Channel. CBBC has a sister brand, CBeebies, for children under 6. The CBBC brands for BBC One and BBC Two are "CBBC One" and "CBBC Two".
CBBC is run by the BBC Children's department, who make the programmes for children up to the age of 16. Most of their offices are in the East Tower of the BBC Television Centre, with some programmes coming from Scotland and Bristol. CBBC produces a whole range of programme types, including drama, news, entertainment and educational programmes.
Anne Gilchrist is Creative Director of CBBC, and Michael Carrington is Creative Director of CBeebies.
Presentation.
Monday 3 September 2007 saw the fifth CBBC relaunch. As part of the relaunch, new logos, idents, interactive services, programmes and presenters were introduced. The previous computer generated backgrounds used from December 2006 were replaced by a real set.
Ed Petrie became the chief continuity presenter, accompanied by a puppet sidekick "Oucho T. Cactus" (operated and voiced by Warrick Brownlow-Pike). They regularly present live, weekday afternoon links on the CBBC channel with Petrie voicing pre-recorded, out-of-vision announcements during for weekdays on BBC One. On 29 August 2008, they went on extended leave to record a new series for CBBC - they are due to return to continuity duties on 1 December 2008. During this period, relief presenter Holly Walsh is presenting weekday afternoon links for the channel.
Anne Foy presented pre-recorded in-vision links at the weekend alongside her dog, Elliot, until her departure in March 2008. Foy was replaced by two new presenters, Ben Hanson and Ciaran Joyce, who previously appeared in CBBC show "The Story of Tracy Beaker". The duo regularly present in-vision links at the weekend and stand in for Ed and Oucho.
CBBC extra.
"CBBC extra" is a free interactive television service from CBBC. It is found on the BBCi pages. It is accessible from the CBBC Channel by pressing the red button and then selecting "CBBC extra". It can also be accessed from any other BBCi page by pressing 570.
The service is different on different digital platforms, for example Sky viewers can access the video loop. But it is only available on Freeview when BBCi is not showing other interactive services, like sports events.
CBBC extra offers games, the UK Top 40 music, jokes sent in by viewers, "Nev's Horoscopes", and a weekly competition. The current presenter of CBBC extra is Ed Petrie.
CBBC Quiz.
This new feature allows the viewers to play a quiz. There are 5 levels, each containing 5 questions. Viewers can also send in their questions which could be shown on the service. The "CBBC Quiz" can be from the CBBC extra page, by selecting the option called "CBBC Quiz". This option is also available on the main interactive menu on the "CBBC Channel", by pressing the red button.
Website.
The CBBC website has a wide range of activities, such as games, puzzles, message boards and frequently updated news feeds. The website is found.
My CBBC.
"My CBBC" is a feature to the new CBBC website. It allows users to create their own room which they can decorate. It is also possible to create your own avatar. The new feature is often promoted on the "CBBC Channel".
Adventure Rock.
"Adventure Rock" (renamed from CBBC World) is a virtual online world that launched on 1 March 2008. Press releases have stated "it would allow digitally literate children the access to characters and resources they had come to expect. Users would be able to build an online presence, known as an avatar, then create and share content."
The main points of the system are safety and responsibility online, with no chatrooms or the financial aspects available in other online worlds such as "Second Life".
Controller of Children's BBC Richard Deverell said: "Adventure Rock" is a good example of the way we need to go. The thing that interests me is that children are at the vanguard. And that is where we are taking Children's BBC."
