Christopher Michael Benoit (May 21, 1967 - June 25, 2007) was a Canadian professionel wrestler. He is best known for wrestling in World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE).
Chris, his wife Nancy, and their 7-year-old son Daniel were found dead in their Fayetteville, Georgia home on June 25 2007.
Career.
During his youth in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, he was trained by Stu Hart. He wanted to become a wrestler because of Tom Billington, the Dynamite Kid. Chris Benoit began his career in 1985 in Stu Hart's Stampede Wrestling promotion. 1989 Stampede Wrestling closed, and Chris went to wrestle in Japan for NJPW. He wore a mask and called himself Pegasus Kid.
In 1990, he won his first major championship, the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship, from Jushin Liger. He later lost the title (and his mask) to Liger, He changed his name to Wild Pegasus. As Wild Pegasus he won the Super Juniors tournament in 1993 and 1995.
Benoit left Japan to wrestle in Germany and Mexico. In 1994 he began working for ECW. In ECW he dropped the name Wild Pegasus. After an accident that broke Sabu's neck, he became known as "The Crippler" Chris Benoit.
Benoit worked For WCW staring in 1995. In 1998, he had a feud with Booker T. They fought in a "Best-of-seven-series" for the WCW World Television Championship. Booker won but he would end up loosing the title to Finlay. This fued helped both mens careers.
WWE.
In 2000 Benoit began wrestling for the WWE. In 2004 he took part in the Royal Rumble. He entered first and won when he eliminated The Big Show. After winning the Royal Rumble, he fought for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship. At WrestleMania XX, he fought against Shawn Michaels and champion Triple H. Benoit won this match by makeing Triple H submit to the Crippler Crossface. At the end of this event, Benoit celebrated in the ring with the WWE Champion Eddie Guerrero. This is looked at as the biggest win in Benoit's Career.
On the June 11 episode of RAW, Benoit was drafted from SmackDown! to ECW as part of the 2007 WWE Draft. Benoit won his first ECW match teaming up with CM Punk and defeating Elijah Burke and Marcus Cor Von.
On June 19, 2007, Benoit wrestled his last match. He beat Elijah Burke in a match to decide who would face CM Punk for the ECW World Championship at Vengeance. Benoit did not appear at the house shows during the weekend of June 23th. He told WWE officials that his wife and son were sick due to food poisoning. When he did not show up for the pay-per-view, viewers were told that it was because of a "family emergency." Johnny Nitro took his place in the title match. Nitro won the match and became ECW Champion.
Death.
On June 25, 2007, Benoit, his wife Nancy, and their 7-year-old son Daniel were found dead in their Fayetteville, Georgia, home at around 2:30 p.m. EDT. Lieutenant Tommy Pope of the Fayette County, Georgia Sheriff's Department reported to ABC News that police entered Benoit's home on a Welfare Check after several missed appointments, leading to concerns. According to several articles on the event, WWE were the ones that called the police to check on the Benoits. Pope also stated the police were not searching for any suspects outside of the house, as the instruments of death were located at the scene of the crime. Detective Bo Turner of the Fayette County Sheriff's Department told television station WAGA-TV that the case was being treated as a murder-suicide. The station reported that investigators had discovered, and would eventually cite as an official ruling, that Benoit murdered his wife and son over the weekend and hung himself sometime on Monday.
WWE cancelled the scheduled three hour long live "Raw" show on June 25, and replaced the broadcast version with a tribute to his life and career, featuring his past matches, segments from the ' DVD, and comments from wrestlers and announcers. However, once the details of the events became apparent, WWE quickly and quietly began distancing itself from the wrestler by removing merchandise and no longer mentioning him.
Media accusations of steroid use and "roid-rage" quickly surfaced after the killings, prompting negative publicity against WWE and professional wrestling overall. Toxicology reports released on July 17, 2007 revealed that at their time of death, Nancy Benoit had three different drugs in her system: Xanax, hydrocodone, and hydromorphone, all of which were found at the therapeutic rather than toxic levels. Daniel Benoit was found to have Xanax in his system, which led the chief medical examiner, Kris Sperry to believe that he was sedated before he was murdered. Chris Benoit was found to have Xanax, hydrocodone, and an elevated level of testosterone, caused by a synthetic form of testosterone, in his system. The chief medical examiner attributed the testosterone level to Benoit possibly being treated for a deficiency caused by previous steroid abuse. There was no indication that anything in Chris' body contributed to his violent behavior that led to the murder-suicide, concluding that there was no "roid-rage" involved.
On August 30, 2007, Benoit was discovered to have been given illegal steroids not in compliance with WWE's Talent Wellness Program in February 2006. Benoit received nandrolone and anastrozole. Eddie Guerrero and Brian Adams were discovered to have been given steroids prior to their deaths during this investigation, as well as former WWE superstar Sylvain Grenier‎ and eleven other WWE superstars, who were suspended in accordance with the WWE Talent Wellness program.
After the double-murder suicide, former wrestler Chris Nowinski contacted Michael Benoit, father of Chris Benoit, suggesting that years of trauma to his son's brain may have led to his actions. Tests were conducted on Benoit's brain by Julian Bailes, the head of neurosurgery at West Virginia University, and results showed that "Benoit's brain was so severely damaged it resembled the brain of an 85-year-old Alzheimer's patient." It was also shown to have an advanced form of dementia and was similar to the brains of four retired NFL players who have suffered multiple concussions, sank into depression and harmed themselves or others. Bailes and his colleagues concluded that repeated concussions can lead to dementia, which can contribute to severe behavioral problems. Benoit's father suggests that brain damage may have been the leading cause of his crime. He also confirmed that his son was quietly cremated, but what was done with the ashes is not public knowledge.
WSB-TV in Atlanta, Georgia obtained the last known photograph of Chris Benoit. The photo was taken in the office of Dr. Phil Astin, on Friday June 22, 2007, just mere hours before the murders.
