Charlie Chaplin (April 16, 1889 – December 25, 1977) was a famous English actor and movie maker. He was very famous in silent movies (where there was no talking or sound). He acted, directed, scripted, and produced them.
Charlie Chaplin was a performer for nearly 70 years, starting at the age of five, and until the age of 80. The character that Charlie Chaplin played most was called "the Tramp". The "Tramp" was a man of good manners, who wore a coat, a pair of big trousers, shoes, and a black hat.
Chaplin growing up.
Charlie first started acting at age five. He acted in a music hall in 1894, standing in for his mother. When Charlie was a child, he was kept in bed for many weeks from a bad illness. At night, his mother would sit at the window and act out what was going on outside. His first important work came when he joined The Eight Lancashire Lads. In 1900, his brother Sydney helped him get the role of a comic cat in the pantomime "Cinderella". In 1903 he was in a play called “Jim:A Romance of Cockayne”. Chaplin was in Casey's 'Court Circus' variety show. The next year, he became a clown in Fred Karno's 'Fun Factory' comedy company.
Awards.
Chaplin won two special Oscars. Chaplin had first been chosen for both "Best Actor" and "Best Comedy Directing". But then, instead, he was given a special award "for versatility and genius in acting, writing, directing and producing". Chaplin's second special award came 44 years later, in 1972. When getting this award, Chaplin had the longest standing ovation (people standing up and clapping) in Academy Award history.
Becoming a Knight.
On March 9, 1975, Charlie Chaplin was knighted in England by Queen Elizabeth II.
Charlie Chaplin's Death.
Chaplin died on Christmas, 1977, in Switzerland. He died of a stroke, at the age of 88. On March 1, 1978, his body was stolen by a small group of Polish people. They were trying to get money from Chaplin’s family. This plan didn’t work. The perpetrators were caught, and Charlie’s body was found 11 weeks later near Lake Geneva. He was buried under concrete to prevent further incidents.
