Craig Ward Anton (born August 28, 1962 in Omaha, Nebraska) is an American actor and comedian. Anton is most notable for being the cast of comedians on the show "MADtv" and for his role as "Lloyd Diffy" in the Disney Channel Original Series "Phil of the Future".
Biography.
Craig was born and raised in Omaha, Nebraska. He is the eldest son of Arthur and Antoinette Anton and of four children. Craig has two younger sisters, Toni (born 1964) and Megan (born 1977), and one younger brother, Brian (1970). Craig's parents are divorced and his father remarried. He is now married to Eileen McBay and they now live in Houston, Texas, while his mother lives in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Early life and career.
Craig attended R.M. Marrs junior high school. He graduated from Burke High School in 1980 and attended University of Nebraska at Kearney. Craig begin his career as a college circuit comedian in the 1980s. In 1984, he traveled the Mediterranean and Middle East as part of the USO comedy tour, where he spent two months in Turkey, Greece, Italy, Israel, Bahrain, and Spain entertaining our troops and in 1985, he was named Showtime's Funniest Person in Nebraska. Craig was nominated from the NACA Campus Entertainer of the Year award three times.
"MADtv".
During his three year tenure, Anton received limited screentime on the show. He primarily did a stand-up segment during some episodes. Aside from his stand-up routine, Anton was often cast as an extra or supporting character. Anton's most enduring character was Clorox from the "Star Trek: Deep Stain Nine" sketches. Clorox was supposed to be the main nemesis of the sketch and was loosely based on Q from the "Star Trek" series. Anton left "MADtv" in 1998, at the end of the season.
Other television projects.
Since leaving "MADtv", Anton developed an extensive resume on television. He co-starred in several television series, including shows like "The Army Show", "Random Play", and "Primetime Glick". In the late 1990s, Anton guest starred on television series credits included "Mr. Show with Bob and David", and "Coach". During the 2000s, Anton appeared in shows like "Curb Your Enthusiasm", "The King of Queens", "Ally McBeal", "Lizzie McGuire", "Everybody Loves Raymond", and "Weekends at the D.L." Anton has also appeared on shows like "Premium Blend" and "Late Friday" where he performed his stand-up routine.
Personal life.
As of 2006, Craig is currently living in Los Angeles, California with his wife, Lesley Barr, and their two daughters, Laura and Claire. They have an Australian shepherd name Wayne and a cat name Snow White. Craig is currently doing "The Tomorrow Show".
