Celsius (more precisely, a degree Celsius), sometimes called centigrade, is a unit of measurement used in many countries to measure temperature. This unit was created by Anders Celsius (1701-1744), a Swedish astronomer.
0 degrees (°) Celsius is the melting point of water at what is called "normal pressure".
100° Celsius is the boiling point of water at normal pressure.
1 °C is therefore one hundredth (the 100th part) of that difference.
Since 1948 this unit is called "Celsius".
The other kind of measurement is Fahrenheit.
History.
In 1742, "Anders Celsius" (1701 – 1744) created a “reversed” version of the modern Celsius temperature scale. In it zero represented the boiling point of water and 100 represented the melting point of ice. In his paper "Observations of two persistent degrees on a thermometer," he wrote about his experiments. His could show in his experiments that the melting point of ice was effectively unaffected by pressure. This was not the case for the boiling point of water. It varied as a function of atmospheric pressure. He proposed that zero on his temperature scale (water’s boiling point) would be calibrated at the mean barometric pressure at sea level. This pressure is known as one standard atmosphere. In 1954, (the General Conference on Weights and Measures) established internationally that one standard atmosphere was a pressure equivalent to 1,013,250 dynes per cm2 (101.325 kPa).
In 1744, the year Anders Celsius died, the famous Swedish botanist Carolus Linnaeus (1707 – 1778) effectively reversed Celsius’s scalewhen he received his first thermometer with a scale where zero represented the melting point of ice and 100 represented water’s boiling point. His custom-made “linnaeus-thermometer,” for use in his greenhouses, was made by Daniel Ekström, Sweden’s leading maker of scientific instruments at the time. Eckstöm's workshop was located in the basement of the Stockholm observatory. As often happened in this age before modern communications, numerous physicists, scientists, and instrument makers are credited with having independently developed this same scale; among them were Pehr Elvius, the secretary of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (which had an instrument workshop) and with whom Linnaeus had been corresponding; Christian of Lyons; Daniel Ekström, the instrument maker; and Mårten Strömer (1707 – 1770) who had studied astronomy under Anders Celsius.
For the next 204 years, the scientific and thermometry communities world-wide referred to this scale as the “centigrade scale.” Temperatures on the centigrade scale were often reported simply as “degrees” or, when greater specificity was desired, “degrees centigrade.” The symbol for temperature values on this scale was °C (in several formats over the years). Because the term “centigrade” was also the Spanish and French language name for a unit of angular measurement (one-hundredth of a right angle) and had a similar connotation in other languages, the term “centesimal degree” was used when very precise, clear language was required by international standards bodies such as the Bureau international des poids et mesures (BIPM). The 9th CGPM (Conférence générale des poids et mesures) and the CIPM (Comité international des poids et mesures) “degree Celsius” (symbol: °C) in 1948. For common people worldwide — including school textbooks — the full change from "centigrade" to "Celsius" required nearly two decades after this formal adoption.
