China (中國) is an ancient region in Asia.
History.
China has one of the oldest civilizations in the world. It has a recorded history for over five thousand years. It reached its golden age during the Tang Dynasty (about A.D. 10th century). China is home to some of the oldest artwork in the world. Statues and pottery, as well as decorations made of jade, are some classic examples.
China's economic and military strength throughout the world was oppressed during the Qing Dynasty (around the 17th century to 20th century). Many of its lands were lost to Russia, the British, the Japanese and other strong countries. In 1911 a country, the Republic of China was founded by Sun Yat-sen (Sun Yixian). But its government was very weak. Army leaders in different area controlled the local governments, and later fell into the dictatorship of Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi).
In 1931, Japan invaded Manchuria, a place in the northeastern part of China. On July 7, 1937, the Japanese attacked the rest of the country, starting what was named the Sino-Japanese War. The war later became part of World War II. The war was fought for eight years and millions of Chinese people were killed. In 1945, after the United States dropped two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan surrendered unconditionally to the Allied Powers.
However, the Chinese Civil War later started between the Kuomindang (Nationalists) of the Republic of China (ROC) and the Communists of the People's Republic of China (PRC).One side wanted to make China like Soviet Union, whreas the other side wanted to keep china in its current state at the time, which caused chaos and lots of people died in the Chinese Civil War. the Chinese Civil War was going on throughout World War II. The Communists, led by Mao Zedong, Liu Shaoqi and others. Later Shaoqi lost influence on Mao and his death to this day remains unresolved. Communists eventually won the war. The Nationalists (led by Chiang Kai-shek) fled to the island of Taiwan and set up their new capital city in Taipei.After the Chinese Civil War, the communist leader Mao Zedong declared a new country, the People's Republic of China (PRC), in Beijing on October 1, 1949.
Arts.
China is the original birth place of Eastern martial arts, called Kung Fu or its first name Wushu. China is also the home of the well-respected Spa Monastery and Wudang Mountains. The first generation of martial art started more for the purpose of survival and warfare than art. Over time some art forms have branched off, while others have retained their distinct Chinese flavor. Regardless, China has brewed some of the most renowned artists including Wong Fei Hung (Huang Fei Hung or Hwang Fei Hung) and many others. Art has also co-existed with a variety of paints including the more standard 18 colors. Legendary and controversial moves like Big Mak are also praised and talked about within the culture.
