Charles Sturt (April 28, 1795 - June 16, 1869) was an English explorer of Australia including the Murray River and the Murrumbidgee River. He was looking for an inland sea.
Early life.
Sturt was born in India where his father was a judge. He went to England to go to school and in 1813 he joined the British Army. He served in France and Ireland. In 1826 Sturt went back to England and was then sent to Australia in charge of a group of convicts (criminals).
Darling River Discovery.
People at this time thought that Australia's inland rivers which flowed west, must have flowed into an inland sea. Another explorer, John Oxley had been stopped from going west down the Lachlan and Macquarie Rivers by a marsh which he thought was the edge of the sea. Sir Ralph Darling, Governor of New South Wales thought that it would be easier to travel in a drought (a long time without rain). This would mean the swamps and marshes would be dry. Darling put Sturt in charge. On November 10 1828 Sturt and a group of 13 men, including explorer Hamilton Hume, which went to find the path of the Macquarie River. He followed the Macquarie River, the Bogan River and the Castlereagh River and found the Darling River which he named after the Governor. They followed the river near from the present town of Bourke for about 100 kms downstream towards the south west. They then went back to Sydney.
Murrumbidgee - Murray Discovery.
On November 3 1829 Sturt led another group of 8 men to follow the path of the Murrumbidgee River. Governor Darling wanted to know where the river went and to find out if it joined the Lachlan River. They went west from Sydney until they reached the Murrumbidgee near the present site of Jugiong and traveled along the river bank as far as the Lachlan River. From there Sturt used a small boat to travel down the river and reached the Murray River on January 14, 1830. The river had already been discovered 6 years earlier by Hamilton Hume and William Hovell and named the Hume River. Sturt, probably hoping for a reward, renamed the river after Sir George Murray, a British politician. After several days, the found a large river joining the Murray from the north, and Sturt rightly guessed that this was the Darling River. He set up a flag pole and raised the British flag, the Union Jack, and had his men give 3 loud cheers. The group continued down the river and reached Lake Alexandrina (named after Princess Alexandrina, later Queen Victoria 1819 - 1901) on February 9, 1830. After finding where the Murray entered the sea, the group then had the difficult and tiring work of rowing the boat back up the river. They left the river near the present site of Narrandera on April 11, 1830 and then walked back to Sydney, getting there on May 25, 1830. Sturt became very sick after the trip and became blind (unable to see).
Retirement from the Army.
Sturt was sent to Norfolk Island in August 1830 on military duty. Norfolk Island was a penal colony where difficult prisoners were sent. He stayed there until January 1832 and then went back to Sydney. Unable to get more important work and still unable to see properly, he went to England and left the army in July 1833. He wrote a book called "Two Expeditions into the Interior of Southern Australia, 1828 - 1831". Sturt was rewarded with a large amount (5000 acres) of land in New South Wales, and in September 1834 sailed to Sydney with his new wife, Charlotte Green.
Farmer.
When he got back to Australia, he took up land near Canberra, then land at Mittagong, and in 1837 lived at Varroville, a farm near Liverpool. Sturt took a herd of cattle overland to Adelaide in 1838. He did more exploring around Adelaide including a trip back to Lake Alexandrina, and north to St.Vincent's Gulf. He moved his family to Adelaide in 1839.
Government Administrator.
Sturt was made the Surveyor-General (person in charge of surveying) by the Governor of South Australia, but a new surveyor arrived who had been put in charge by the government in England. He worked as Assistant Land Commissioner until this job was abolished (stopped) by England. For a short time he was paid less to work as Registrar-General. He was unhappy, and hoped a new expedition would improve his chances of a better job. He wanted to go into the middle of Australia and look for an inland sea. Another explorer, Edward John Eyre had found his way to the north blocked by what he thought was a huge salt lake, shaped like a horse shoe. It is really 6 large dry salt lakes. Sturt hoped that he could get around the lakes by going farther to the east.
Depot Glen.
Sturt and 16 men left Adelaide on August 15, 1844, with 11 horses, 200 sheep, 32 bullocks, six dogs, a number of carts, wagons and a boat. They followed the Darling River north to Menindee Laidley's Ponds. On January 15, 1845 the group reached a waterhole 16 kms west of the present site of Milparinka. They called this camp on Preservation Creek, Depot Glen.
Because of the heat and drought, Sturt decided to rest the expedition there for 6 months. They dug an underground room to try and get away from the heat. It was so hot the lead fell out of their pencils, and the wood of their equipment boxes shrank so much that the screws fell out. The man who was second in charge, an Irish surveyor named James Poole, died from scurvy. His grave can still be seen. Sturt and his men stacked a large pile of rocks to create a cairn on top of Mount Poole. John McDouall Stuart was made second in charge to assist Sturt. When Sturt's eyesight got worse and he became nearly blind, Stuart took over the job of drawing up the maps.
Fort Grey.
Sturt split the group into two, with one group returning to Adelaide. Following some rain, Sturt moved the other group west to another waterhole on Frome Creek, which they named Fort Grey. His path west was blocked by a dry salt lake, Lake Blanche, so he took a small group north west between Cooper Creek and the Diamantina River. Here he found a desert of stones, called gibbers, which was difficult to cross. The stones hurt the feet of the horses and bullocks. This desert has been named Sturt's Stony Desert. By September 1845 he had reached the Simpson Desert and could go no farther. He went back 713 kilometres to Fort Grey.
He then tried to go north, getting close to the present site of Birdsville but again the Stony Desert stopped him. It was very hot, his thermometer burst at 53 degrees Celsius and Sturt decided to go back to Adelaide. He was so sick that he couldn't ride and had to be carried in a cart. They arrived back on January 19, 1846. He was unhappy as he had not found an inland sea, or reached the centre of Australia.
Return to England.
In February 1846 Sturt was made Colonial Treasurer, he also received a gold medal from the Royal Geographical Society. He went to England and wrote a book "Narrative of an Expedition into Central Australia" before going back to Adelaide. He was made a member of the South Australian parliament. He retired from work at the end of 1851 and in 1853 took his family back to England. He asked to be made Governor of Victoria, and later Governor of Queensland, but it did not happen. He died suddenly in 1869, just after being nominated for K.C.M.G., a British knighthood.
Sturt today.
Image:Sturts desert pea.jpg|thumb|Sturt's Desert Pea
Charles Sturt is remembered in Australia with many memorials. There are rock cairns and signs that show many of the places he explored. Two plants were named after him, Sturt's Desert Pea (Swainsona formosa), the floral emblem of South Australia, and Sturt's Desert Rose (Gossypium sturtianum), the floral emblem of the Northern Territory. Sturt found the plant in creeks near the site of Broken Hill, New South Wales in 1844. He collected the seeds and brought them back for Robert Brown (1773-1858), a Scottish botanist, to study.
The Sturt Highway is the main road between Sydney and Adelaide.
The Charles Sturt University is a large university with campuses in country New South Wales. These are in Albury, Bathurst, Dubbo, Orange and Wagga Wagga.
The Sturt National Park is a large park in the north west corner of New South Wales. The park covers 340,000 hectares of semi desert country. There are several historic Sturt sites in the park including Fort Grey.
