Cabal Online is a free Massive Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game (MMORPG) created by ESTsoft Corporation.
Overview.
The game takes place in a mythical world known as Nevareth, which has been destroyed by an evil entity known as CABAL. Survivors of the destruction were scattered across the now-barren landscape. In this world, seven "masters" rose up, each possessing the ancient abilities of the "Force Power". These masters taught the people, and the world was rebuilt. One year later, the CABAL is plotting a return to power by breeding a child to be the new king of the people. The players of the game take up the role of heroes who battle the CABAL uprising and conspiracy.
Characters.
There are six characters players can choose from in Cabal Online. They are: Warrior, Blader, Magician, Force Archer, Force Blader and Force Shielder.
Warrior.
Warriors are those who have inherited the very first form of "force". They practice physical strength by using force rather than manipulating it, thus being a warrior requires being more physically superior than those of the other forms of force. As they prioritize physical power over technique and speed, their fights are often more thrilling and dynamic. However, their understanding of force manipulation is quite limited, so their intelligence is given less priority in their training. However, experienced warriors are said to be able to awaken their latent abilities by using force to become berserker warriors and summon Astral Weapons by experiencing a spiritual awakening in force.
They start at Bloody Ice. Warriors have high attack and high defense. Their high HP and high defense combine with their high damage and hard hitting skills make them hard to kill in both PvP and PvE. Most of their skills are slower to cast than other classes, but their damage is greater. Warriors are great for beginners. Their main weapon is a 2-handed great sword or a 2-handed Daikatana. Their Summoned Astral Weapon is a Scythe.
Blader.
Their practice is focused on maximizing physical abilities by using force, and they prioritize dazzling technique and speed over destructive power. In the beginning, they used various kinds of weapons, but they quickly realized that the best partners for their skills were dual swords, and settled with them. Since then, they use single or double bladed dual swords as their primary weapons, and wear light armor such as "Martial Suit Set" from the Huan continent for speed. Just like the warriors, bladers have very limited understanding of force, and so mainly practice physical strength and agility more than studying the knowledge of force, which requires intelligence. Experienced bladers are said to be able to create multiple ghosts of themselves by maximizing their agility, and to bring instant death to their enemies by summoning deadly Astral Weapons which are the results of their spiritual awakening in force.
Their starting area is Desert Scream. Bladers have high attack and defense rate, but lack of defense ruins a Blader's chance in PvP. This lead to the creation of the Heavy Blader, a Blader wearing Warrior armors. Their skills are rather fast and some do AOE. Bladers are good for beginners. They mainly wield either dual blades or dual katanas for their weapons. Their Summoned Astral Weapon are claws...
Wizard.
Wizards are magic users who manipulate Force to compensate their physical weakness. In the early years of Nevareth, they used a type of Force controller called "Force Stick" that was inherited from the Honorable Age, but as Core Technology was retrieved and developed, they started using Orbs. Orbs are one-handed, which means that Wizards can be equipped with an Orb in both hands to double their power. It also leads them to be able to cast multiple magic spells at the same time (although this is only possible during Double-Caster Mode.) Wizards invest a lot of effort in intelligence in order to efficiently control Force. At the same time, they do not possess much physical strength or agility. Thus they prefer to wear light armor such as Martial Suit Set. According to an unconfirmed theory, they avoid metallic armor because it prevents them from close contact with outer forces. Well-experienced wizards are said to be able to simultaneously use multiple magic spells with ease, and inflict enormous damage just by using a simple spell.
Their starting area is Desert Scream. Most of the Wizard's skills have AOE. A Wizard's defense is very low, but their AOE skills have stun and knockdown effects, which nearly makes them unhittable in PvE. PvP-wise, Wizards are still very powerful. Their stun-knockdown attacks combine with their Fade Step-Dash-Blink skills makes them hard to kill. Their Summoned Astral Weapon is an Orb that lets them attack two targets.
Force Archer.
Among the three independent combat skills, "Force Archers" originated on top of the Wizard group. They realized the potential of long-range magic spells, and studied how to intensify the potency of magic spells. It is common knowledge among force handlers that the relation between range and space is in opposite proportion to the one between space and power. The founders of the Force Archer skills were greatly intrigued by distance and speed rather than space and power. They established the intensive long-range force attack skills for Force Archers, and created "Crystals", an advanced version of a Wizard's "Orb", which specializes in controlling force more than intensifying it. This great invention which has resulted in creating another invention, "Astral Bow" which minimizes the risk of power decrease when using long-range force and improves force control and attack speed at the same time. Later, it served as a momentum for "Astral Weapons", the embodiment of force. Controlling Crystals requires a minimum of physical strength and agility. Force Archers do not move around much compared to other classes due to their unique battle style, and they wear armor such as "Battle Suit Set" from the Pastur continent, which possesses better defense than light clothing armor. Experienced Force Archers can perform quick long-range force attacks and if they achieve a master level in force control they can deliver a fatal blow to an enemy from a far distance with one shot.
Their starting area is Green Despair. Force Archers have the longest range in of all the classes, as well as the fastest casting time. Their defense and defense rate are average. They have a small array of support skills and healing powers. They are powerful in PvP because of their long range and high damage they are able to deal. Their main weapon are two crystals. Their Summoned Astral Weapon are a pair of dual guns.
Force Blader.
At the beginning, Force Bladers were using a sword in one hand and a Force controller in the other hand. Unlike defensive Force Shielders, Force Bladers prioritize agility for precise attacks. With the same reason, they cannot wear armor heavier than Battlesuit Set such as Armorsuit Set. Also for the Force controller, they preferred to use "Orb" which focuses on destructive power more than Force control. The research in Force Bladers obtained a fruitful result in establishing Agility Force Bladers, but it was not that satisfactory. Agility Force Blader's sword skills were not as strong as Bladers' skills, and their magic skills were not as powerful as Wizards' or Force Archers' skills. They were also unable to perform support magic spells unlike Force Shielders. They must find another way to improve their power. After long research, they realized that using sword and magic spells at the same time would compensate for the weakness. Then they created unique battle skills as known as "Magic Sword Skills". This is how Force Bladers, the Magic Swordsmen have been established. Since Force Bladers must be equally skillful in fencing and magic, they try to keep balance their practice in physical strength and intelligence. Although there are not yet many Magic Sword Skills introduced, still Force Bladers can use joint sword and magic skills. Well-experienced Force Bladers are told to be able to combine every possible magic spell with their sword skills, and inflict more damage by mastering combining magic and sword skills.
Their starting area is Green Despair. Force Bladers are the hardest to level in the game because they must constantly skill train both Magic and Sword skills to be effective.They can be very powerful in the end. Because they can use both range and close-range attacks, melee classes like the warrior and the blader do not always fair well with them in PvP. They also have extremely powerful debuff skills, which if used correctly can give a force blader a good advantage over the enemy. Force Bladers have powerful hard hitting skills. Like the Heavy Blader, there are also Heavy Force Bladers. Force Bladers are not recommended for beginners. They can choose between blade/crystal, katana/orb, katana/crystal, blade/orb as their weapons of choice. Their Summoned Astral Weapon is an Arm Cannon that lets you use a magic lance skill after first using a sword skill once to launch an attack from the cannon.
Force Shielder.
The creation of the Astral Shield opened a new chapter in the history of Nevarethian armor. The Astral Shield has such high defense strength that it can serve offensive purposes as well. Some Warriors and Bladers, who desperately needed a new way to fight and defend have become Force Shielders. They wanted higher defense as well as establishing their own unique battle style. Thus, they started using the heaviest armor such as Warrior's Armor Suit while carrying the Astral Shield. Force Shielders specialize in short-range force control, which means that they are incapable of doing long-range attacks except through magic. However, they make up for this weakness by developing supporting magic spells which increase their attack strength by using outer forces near their bodies. It's these methods which match those of the Wizard's strongest asset. This revolutionary invention has become a turning point in the Nevarethian battle style. Force Shielders must invest a lot of their effort in physical strength in order to be equipped with Armor Suit, the strongest yet heaviest armor, as well as an understanding of force in order to skillfully control force. They also need to consider dexterity for decent hit rate since they can only use one-handed swords. Experienced Force Shielders know various ways of manipulating Astral Shields, and can perfect their defense if they master in short-range force control.
Their starting area is Bloody Ice. A Hybrid class, they have high defense and can do high damage. They have very powerful AOE skills. Magic Force Shielders are said to be better in PvP because of its range. They can choose between blade/crystal for PvE or katana/orb for PvP. Their Summoned Astral Weapon is a bigger shield that can be thrown like a boomerang.
