"Charmed" is an American television series. It is the story of three sister witches known as the Charmed Ones who fight demons and warlocks. "Charmed" was on The WB television network for 8 seasons from 1998 until 2006. Charmed ended production April 2006. Its last episode "Forever Charmed" was shown on 21 May, 2006.
Plot.
The story begins when Phoebe finds the Book of Shadows after seeing the word "ATTIC" spelled out on the spirit board. She reads out an incantation which gives them their powers. They remained a threesome until their sister, Prudence (Prue), dies fighting the demon Shax. Shortly after Prue dies, Piper casts a "To Find A Lost Soul" spell and finds that they have a younger half-sister, Paige Matthews. The triad or Power of Three is once again complete. This continues until the seventh season. After vanquishing the demon Zankou and an astral projection form of themselves everyone believes that they are died. They give up magic to have normal lives. But the magic is still alive. They are sought out to help a young new witch named Billie who is a college student wanting to fight demons. Paige is first drawn to her because she is Billie's Whitelighter.
The Sisters.
"Prue Halliwell: Prue was the oldest sister of the Charmed Ones. She had the powers to move objects with her mind (Telekinesis) and Astral Projection. Prue was engaged to a police officer named Andy. He died at the end of season 1. She died at the end of season 3. Prue's power to move objects with her mind is connected with her emotions. It is affected by anger. He power is stronger when she feels the need to protect herself and her sisters, or protect the innocents or the other good creatures.
Piper Halliwell: Piper was the middle child before Prue died, but now she is the oldest. She has a husband, Leo. Leo used to be the Charmed Ones' Whitelighter. Piper also has three children: Wyatt and Christopher and a daughter that the sisters (Prue Piper and Pheobe) saw on a trip to the future. Piper has the power to blow things up and to freeze things. Piper's powers are connected with her emotions. When she panics, she has the urge to freeze people and when she gets angry she usually blows things up.
Phoebe Halliwell: Phoebe was the youngest before Prue died, but now she is the middle child. Phoebe was married to a demon. His human name is Cole Turner and his demon name is Belthazor.
She is now married to coop a cupid and has three children. Phoebe has the power to see the past and the future, the ability to levitate, and is able to read others feelings/thoughts.
Paige Mathews: Paige is the half-sister to the Halliwell sisters. She is the youngest of the sisters. She is the daughter of Patricia "Patty" Halliwell (Mother of the Halliwell sisters) and Sam Wilder (Patty's Whitelighter). She came into the series when Prue died. She has Prue's power of telekinesis but with a twist because she is half whitlighter. She has the power to orb things to her. Prue only had to think about something to move it, Paige must reach out to it and call for it (that is when it orbs to her.) She also has the Whitelighter abilities of Orbing. She finally receives the power to heal in the middle of season 8.
Their Husbands.
Leo started out on the show as the Charmed Ones' Whitelighter.Then he became and elder Leo died during World War II. Then he was reborn as a whitlighter. He was a medic in the military. After being the Whitelighter for the Charmed Ones for several years, Leo was elevated to the position of Elder. He later joined a group of beings called The Avatars. By the end of the series, he had fallen from grace and was made mortal again. He has killed two Elders and many demons to protect Prue, Piper, Phoebe, Paige, Wyatt and Chris.
Cole Turner: Phoebe's ex-husband also known as the demon Balthazar.
He was half human/half demon. His demon side was strongest until he met and fell in love with Phoebe. As a demon, he could not help hurting the sisters. He asked Phoebe to strip (remove) his powers. After he helped vanquish the Source of All Evil, he became the new Source. In spite of Phoebe's love for Cole, she and her two sisters vanquish him, or so they thought. Cole came back and helped the sisters many times. Cole was eventually vanquished for good. Cole loved Phoebe very much. He would stop at nothing to win her back but he never succeeded.
Coop is a Cupid. He was sent to Phoebe by the Elders to help her find love. He realizes that he loves her and he wants to be with her. Phoebe does not feel the same way until the series finale.
He is a human. He worked as a parole officer. He is one of the only people who understood Paiges powers well not understood but accepted, there love is very strong.
Demons.
Demons are evil creatures with powers that try to kill the Charmed Ones. They don't have souls so therefore can kill innocent people with contious. Most demons work for "The Source" but some hate him. The Source of all Evil is a very powerful demon who rules the Underworld. The Charmed ones have killed The Source three times. There are different ranks of demons and the Charmed ones have faced them all. In some situation demons actually helped the Charmed ones. Demons try to kill the Charmed ones to impress the Source and all of the Underworld.
The Book of Shadows.
The Book of Shadows is the Charmed One's magical book. It contains spells, potions and information of various magical creatures such as demons and warlocks. The Book of Shadows has been around since beginning of the family line. The book has its own defensive power. Whenever evil tries to touch the book, it jumps away. Each generation has added to the Book of Shadows making it more and more powerful. For example, in the final episode, each of the sisters adds all that they have learned so that future generations of Halliwell witches can learn from their experiences.
