Culture is a word for people's "way of life", meaning the way they do things. A group of people has a separate culture when that group sets itself apart from others through its actions.
Not everyone agrees on the meaning of culture. To some, it means the outlook or opinion of an entire society, that can be reflected in their words, books and writing, religion, music, clothes, cooking, etc.
National cultures.
Cultures are what make countries unique. Each country has different cultural activities and cultural rituals. Culture is more than just material goods, that is things the culture uses and produces. Culture is also the beliefs and values of the people in that culture. Culture also includes the way people think about and understand the world and their own lives.
Different countries have different cultures. For example, some older Japanese people wear kimonos, arrange flowers in vases, and have tea ceremonies.
Regional or local cultures.
Culture can also vary within a region, society or sub group. A workplace may have a specific culture that sets it apart from similar workplaces. A region of a country may have a different culture than the rest of the country. For example, Canada's east coast Maritime region has a different culture than the rest of Canada, which is expressed by different ways of talking, different types of music, and different types of dances.
A family may have a specific set of values, morals or beliefs that differ from other families of the same ethnic background. For example, a family may emphasize community values.
Company cultures.
Companies or other organizations (groups of people) can have a separate culture. Japanese manufacturing companies often have a different culture than other companies; the workday starts with exercise, and the workers are very loyal to the company.
Companies in the high-technology sector often have a different culture than other companies. Software and computer companies sometimes allow employees to play games during the workday, or take time off work to relax, because these companies believe that this will help the workers to think better.
Anthropology.
"Anthropology" is studying human beings and how they relate to each other. An "anthropologist" is a person who studies anthropology. Anthropologists believe that people use symbols to communicate (express) their experiences -- who they are, what they believe, where they started.
Anthropologists call this use of symbols "culture". For example, immigrants (people who move from one country to another) may keep some of their customs from their old country. By keeping their culture in this way, they express who they are and that they came from somewhere else.
