Computer viruses are harmful (bad) computer programs. Viruses could get rid of and damage files on your computer. It could corrupt files and slow down computer operation [workings].
Risk of using computers.
The Internet lets millions of computer users around the world link together for business and fun. Many different people use the internet. Anyone using the Internet can find information about many different subjects, in many different languages, in very little time.
The Internet makes it possible for one person to damage or slow thousands of computers that are linked to it. They can do this by writing computer programs. Or, they can make the computer fill itself with so much useless information that it stops working. if you are not careful you could make your computer crash.
Great loss by "worm".
On January 24, 2003, a kind of computer virus called a "worm" was released to infect the Internet. A worm is a series of computer instructions that makes copies of itself and sends it to other computers.
This worm sent copies of itself to computers across the Internet. The worm temporarily damaged millions of computers around the world. It slowed large groups of computers called networks.
Three servers defending the Internet crashed due to the worm.
One large American banking company had to close about 13,000 of its ATMs (machines that let people get money from their bank). People could no longer get cash from the bank’s machines using their credit cards.
A large worldwide airline could not sell tickets using the Internet because the worm made its computers fail. Emergency service workers in the western American City of Seattle, Washington could not answer emergency calls because the worm caused their computers to fail.
Computer experts named the worm "W-Thirty-Two-Slammer". They said the worm caused a problem for the Internet that was similar to a traffic jam: when there are too many cars on a road in a large city, and no one can move. The Slammer worm caused an information jam.
The experts believe the worm was first created in Asia. An American computer expert said evidence seemed to show the virus first appeared in Hong Kong. A government computer team in Hong Kong is working to find who released the new virus.
South Korea may have been the worst affected (hurt) nation in the January 24th attack. On January 27th, a spokesman for South Korea’s Information and Communication Ministry said computer communications on the Internet were almost back to normal. The ministry also said experts were working to find from where the computer virus came.
Computer experts in China and Taiwan also reported problems with the worm. Computers in Japan suffered some problems, but they were limited to a few schools and companies.
By the morning of January 28, computer experts around the world had stopped the worm or made their computer systems safe against the Slammer. Experts believe the worm cost computer networks many millions of dollars in delays, lost business, and the loss of work usually done on a computer.
The person who wrote the instructions that created the Slammer worm attacked computers that use the Microsoft's computer operating system. Microsoft quickly provided the necessary computer instructions to make its system safe and prevent the Slammer worm from attacking other computers.
The kind of program that made the Microsoft system safe is called a "patch" or "update". Microsoft says it wants to improve the speed of future updates or patches for computer users linked to the Internet, keeping harm from their products.
Computer experts say the Internet has become extremely important every day in every area of the world. They say businesses, local governments and private citizens everywhere are using the Internet as an important part of their business or daily life. The experts say some businesses could no longer exist without the Internet. However, many businesses, local governments and private citizens have failed to learn how to protect their computers from viruses or worm attacks.
Anti-virus company.
Sophos P-L-C is a computer company in Britain that makes programs that protect computers against viruses and worms. It is the fourth largest anti-virus company.
Recently, Sophos company officials warned computer users against many new viruses and worms. The officials said recent evidence shows that some people are working hard to make illegal computer programs. The Sophos company said this in a newspaper report printed in Singapore on January fourteenth, only ten days before the Slammer worm attack.
Graham Cluley is a computer expert with the Sophos company. He says computer security companies expect more viruses and worms this year. He says virus writers want to create the next super virus or worm. These can be easily spread by electronic mail or from a computer communications method called Instant Messaging. Mister Cluley said this kind of virus or worm causes the greatest problems.
The Sophos Company experts say about 80,000 computer viruses are now known to exist. The experts say about 600 new computer viruses are released into the Internet each month.
Mister Cluley says nine of last year's ten most damaging viruses were spread by electronic mail to computers that use Microsoft Windows as their operating system.
A company called F-Secure also makes computer security programs. Its experts say new kinds of computer attacks will be aimed at damaging millions of computers very quickly. This kind of attack is called a "flash worm". It would be able to infect millions of computers in less than fifteen minutes. An F-Secure company computer expert says it is just a matter of time before someone tries to infect the Internet with such a program.
Anti-virus program usefulness.
Computer experts say many private citizens, businesses, and local governments are not concerned about computer security until they suffer a damaging attack. Such an attack can cost computer users a great deal of money in lost business, lost information or damaged computer equipment. They say the attack can be more costly than providing good communications security.
The experts say that using a computer anti-virus program is the first step in protecting a business or private computer. An anti-virus program searches the computer for, and guards against, viruses. It also inspects incoming e-mail and new programs for viruses.
The experts say that many good computer companies produce anti-virus protection programs. Most companies that offer anti-virus programs also provide new information called "updates" to protect against new viruses or worms as they appear.
Another way of protection.
An American company called McAfee Security produces a popular anti-virus protection program. Other companies, for example Symantec and Computer Assosicates, sell programs that do the same thing. Computer experts say a good anti-virus program is only the first step in computer security. The experts list a number of things computer users can also do to help protect their computers.
For example, do not open any file attached to electronic mail if it comes from an unknown person or place. Delete electronic mail from unknown people. Make copies of all important documents and keep them in a safe place. This should be done often to protect valuable information.
Computer experts agree that everyone should refuse computer information from strangers. They also agree that users must be extremely careful when copying any kind of information from the Internet to their computer's memory. All experts agree that doing these things is better than suffering a virus or worm attack.
The Internet is fun, educational and a great business tool. But because of computer virus attacks, safety is extremely important.
The article above is a reuse and rewriting of a public domain material from Voice of America Special English.
