The Cuban Missile Crisis was a period of tension between the Soviet Union and the United States, using Cuba as a battleground. It happened when the Soviet Union began building missile sites in Cuba in 1962.
In 1959, the new revolutionary government of Cuba confiscated (took over) some American businesses which were producing goods (things to sell) there. America refused to buy anything from Cuba after that. The U. S. embargo against Cuba began February 7, 1962. In 1962, America was worried that the USSR would attack America through Cuba, since Cuba is near enough to the United States that the missiles could reach any important American city.
In October 1962, America blocked Soviet ships carrying missiles from going into Cuba. The Soviets and Cubans agreed to remove the missiles if America promised not to invade Cuba. America later removed some missiles from the country of Turkey, near the Soviet Union. But whether anyone "won" isn't really known, and the USSR lost China's support over it.
Fidel Castro.
In Cuba, Fidel Castro took power from General Batista in January 1, 1959. From 1952 to 1959, Batista was a military dictator in Cuba, very right-wing with Communist and Mafia connections and the support of the Eisenhower Administration. The United States was interested in Cuba because of the many businesses that they had there, even though the country was a dictatorship. The countries were also military friends. This was shown by the US base at Guantánamo Bay. When Castro came to power in Cuba, he nationalised American companies in Cuba, meaning he took the private property from those companies and made it the property of Cuba, to use as Castro decided. The United States decided to break off economic relations with Cuba (which means that they would stop buying things from them).
They stopped all aid going to Cuba and stopped buying Cuban sugar (which was Cuba's main export). This was a disaster for Castro, because America bought the most Cuban sugar. However, Russia saved the Cuban economy by buying Cuban sugar for a lot of money.
The Solution.
Castro turned to the USSR, still powerful at that time. He signed a contract with Nikita Khrushchev, the Russian president at the time. The contract said that the USSR would buy 1 million tonnes of Cuban sugar once a year, every year in exchange for Castro's Communist support; he declared himself a Marxist-Leninist, December 2, 1961.
The Bay of Pigs.
The Eisenhower Administration was worried that Castro was a Communist. This was a threat to American security. A timeline (chronology) released by the Naional Security Archives shows the U. S. began planning to overthrow the government of Cuba in October, 1959. After the nationalizaton of American property on the island, Eisenhower broke diplomatic relations with the revolutionary government of Cuba on January 3, 1961 and plans were made to topple (to remove from a position of authority) the Castro regime. The Kennedy Administration inherited those plans. On April 17, 1961, the CIA launched (initiated) an operation later called the Bay of Pigs Invasion by Brigade 2506. The goal was for a group of Cubans including some who were still loyal to General Batista to attack Cuba and overthrow Castro; presumably (it was taken for granted or assumed), the American armed forces would back up the invasion but President Kennedy refused to give the order.
As the troops set off to attack Cuba, Kennedy grew nervous. The president suffered from a rare endocrine disorder of chronic adrenal insufficiency called Addison's disease for which he received steroid and cortisone treatment. Stress calls on the adrenal glands to function. One of the clinical symptoms of an Addisonian (adrenal) crisis is confusion and psychosis. There was substantial secrecy surrounding his health during his years as president and the 25th amendment to the U. S. Constitution was introduced at least in part as a result of this secrecy. He thought that an American backed operation against a Communist state would lead to a full scale war against Krushchev. Kennedy decided not to provide American air support at the last moment. This led to the Bay of Pigs being a complete failure. Kennedy was humiliated in the United States and also the USSR.
The results of the Bay of Pigs.
Castro wanted to feel safe from the United States. He knew that if a second Bay of Pigs happened, that Cuba might lose and he would be removed from power. He asked Krushchev for missile sites to be built on Cuba so that he could defend himself against any American threat. The USSR agreed to this and started building missile sites on Cuba. These missles could hit every major city in the United States.
When Kennedy found out about the missile sites on October 16 by sending a United States Navy F-8 Crusader to take pictures of Cuba, he saw the missile sites and immediately came to the worst conclusion: that Cuba was preparing to attack the USA.
Kennedy's Options.
Kennedy chose to build a blockade around Cuba to stop all ships going there. The blockade was put in place on October 20.
Krushchev's Options / The Krushchev Letters.
The USSR's first ships arrived at the blockade on October 25 and were turned away.
Krushchev was saying that he would remove the missile sites if he promised not to invade Cuba. An invasion of Cuba would make Krushchev look bad and could also lead to a nuclear war. This was the reaction that Kennedy wanted.
The very next day a second letter was sent from Russia to Kennedy. This one looked more official than the first. It also said that the US must take it's nuclear missiles out of Turkey if they wanted Russia to take their missiles out of Cuba. It would have been a fair trade because the US missiles in Turkey were close enough to Russia that they could reach most of the important cities and Cuba was close enough to the US that the Russian missiles would reach most of the important US cities. The problem for Kennedy was that he could not publicly agree to remove the US missiles from Turkey because Turkey would then not be protected and they would not be happy. Another problem was that Kennedy and his advisers did not know if Krushchev was still in power. They thought that someone in the Russian government might have overthrown Krushchev. They thought this because the second letter was so much different than the first. Kennedy decided to send a secret message to Krushchev saying that they would remove the missiles from Turkey in a few months as long as they did not tell the public about it. Kennedy then sent an official letter to Krushchev agreeing to the conditions of the first letter and ignoring the second.
Krushchev agreed to the secret message.
On November 1, the missile sites were removed and the problems were over.
Who won the Cuban Missile Crisis?
Nobody really knows who won the Cuban Missile Crisis. Krushchev said that he had won because the United States never bothered Cuba again and the missile sites in Turkey were removed. But he had lost respect from China. China broke off relations with the USSR and Krushchev had to quit.
The United States saw Kennedy as the hero who had fought Communism and won.
