"Doctor Who" is a science fiction television series from the United Kingdom. The series is about an alien time-traveller known as "the Doctor". In his space-and-time-ship, the TARDIS, the Doctor and his companions travel through space and time.
The television series ran from 1963–1989, and again runs since 2005. A television movie was made in 1996. It is one of the oldest and the longest running science fiction television series in the world.
There were also two "Doctor Who" movies made in the 1960s. Peter Cushing played the Doctor in these movies. There was also a television movie starring Paul McGann. There have also been many "Doctor Who" books, comics, etc.
Story outline.
The story is about a man who calls himself "the Doctor". He travels in his space-time-ship TARDIS ("Time And Relative Dimension In Space"), with which he can go anywhere in time and space. Because of an error in its "chameleon circuit", the outside of the TARDIS always looks like a 1950s-style British police box (similar to a blue telephone box), but on the inside the TARDIS is much bigger.
The Doctor is an alien, a "Time Lord" from the planet Gallifrey. At first he traveled only with his granddaughter Susan Foreman. Later the Doctor took other people with him, who are usually called "companions" or "assistants". The Doctor and his companions travel through space and time, have a lot of adventures, and often save many people.
An often made mistake is the name of the Doctor: Often people think that the main character is named "Doctor Who" like the series, but the character is just named "the Doctor".
History.
"Doctor Who" was first shown in 1963. The actor William Hartnell played the First Doctor. The series went on, with different actors as the Doctor. In 1989 the series stopped.
A television movie, also called "Doctor Who", was made in 1996. Actor Paul McGann played the Eighth Doctor, who had regenerated from the Seventh Doctor in the beginning of the movie.
In 2005, the show started again, with Christopher Eccleston as the Ninth Doctor.
In the "Guinness World Records", "Doctor Who" is listed as the longest running science fiction television series in the world.
The Doctor.
The Doctor is the central character of "Doctor Who". He is an alien, a "Time Lord" from the planet Gallifrey. The Doctor travels in his space-time-ship TARDIS, with which he can go anywhere in time and space. Because the TARDIS' "chameleon circuit" is broken, it looks like an old British police-box permanently. The Doctor often takes other people with him, who are usually called "companions" or "assistants". They are most often human; the most recent companion was Donna Noble.
As a Gallifreyan the Doctor looks like a human on the surface, but there are differences. One well-known difference is that he has two hearts. As a Time Lord the Doctor can also "regenerate", if his body is badly hurt and he dies. During the "regeneration", the body is healed and renewed, which includes a different appearance and personality. The regenerated person is the same person, with the same memories and basic personality traits; but the person also looks different and a changed personality. Because of this the Doctor could be played by different actors. This made it possible for the series to be filmed over a time of forty years without having to actually "change" the character.
Incarnations and Actors of the Doctor.
Up until now, the Doctor has regenerated nine times, and each "incarnation" was played by a different actor.
The Doctor has played by other actors in other media, in theatre plays, parodies, etc. But these are not officially part of the "Doctor Who" story.
Peter Cushing also starred as the Doctor in the TV Movie "Dr.Who & the Daleks" although this isn't said to be part of the official storyline so Peter Cushing's Doctor isn't actually included in the official Doctor's life. Another ninth Doctor was in a internet video he was played by Richard E. Grant but he is not officially part of the "Doctor Who" story.
TARDIS.
The TARDIS is the Doctor's time and space machine. It can travel through time and space. It normally has a special feature, called the Chameleon Circuit. The Chameleon Circuit makes the TARDIS' outside change shape, so that it is disguised in whatever time and place it appears. The Chameleon Circuit on the Doctor's TARDIS is broken. It is stuck in the shape of a police telephone box. (Real police-boxes were like telephone boxes, except they were only used for people to call the police, if they had a problem. They were used by the police, sometimes as work-stations until the 1960s.)
The farthest the Doctor has ever travelled in the TARDIS is to the Big Bang and 100 trillion years into the future (in the episode "Utopia"). The inside of the TARDIS is much bigger than its outside (it is "dimensionally transcendental"). It has a lot of different rooms, but the most important is the "console room".
The TARDIS stands for "Time And Relative Dimension In Space".
Companions.
The Doctor usually takes other people with him, who are usually called "companions" or "assistants". The Doctor and his companions travel through space and time, have a lot of adventures, and often save many people.
The character of the companion was there so that the people watching the series could identify and feel close to a character. The companions were often present-time humans, so people could feel close to them, and they knew as much as the viewers. Because of this, the Doctor could explain things to his companions, and at the same time to the viewers. Almost all the Doctor's companions have been human, or human-looking aliens. Two companions were robots.
Daleks.
The Daleks are one of the most powerful races ever in the Doctor Who history and are the Doctor's worst enemies. They cry "EX-TER-MIN-ATE!" when they are about to kill someone. They come in different colours, like bronze, black, red, white, gold, and silver. They first appeared in the first season episode of the series (in "The Daleks") and they were last seen in the two-part episode "The Stolen Earth"/"Journey's End" (2008). They are not robots, but horrible aliens kept in a metal casing, because they became mutated during a war on their planet, Skaro. They were created by an evil scientist named Davros. They can not be easily hurt by guns as their casing reflects the bullets that come from the gun.
Cybermen.
Cybermen are another of the enemies of the Doctor. They come from the planet Mondas and travel across the universe taking people and turning them into machines. They have been known to stomp around saying "DELETE!". They change their look over time.
The Doctor has faced them many times, the first was in "The Tenth Planet" (William Hartnell's final episode) and they are one of his worst enemies.
Sontarans.
The Sontarans are a group of aliens that must face their enemy in combat because of their weak spot on the back of their neck. They have been mentioned to look like a baked potatoe.
Sea Devil.
The Sea Devills they lived when the dinosaurs lived until the moon came to close to the earth and they slept for hundreds of years. The sea devils only apear in the orginal run of series.
Time Lords.
The Time Lords are a group of people like the Doctor with two hearts, they can change their bodies when they get hurt. All of the Time Lords except the Doctor and the Master were killed in the "Time War". This was a big war with the Daleks. The Doctor ended the war by blowing up his planet, Gallifrey, killing the Daleks and his own people. It has made him sad ever since.
The Master.
The Master is an evil Time Lord from the same planet as the Doctor. He knew the Doctor when they were young, and they used to be friends. He also uses a TARDIS, which is able to change into any shape.
Like the Doctor, the Master has been played by many actors, the first being Roger Delgado and the most recent being John Simm.
The Master is known for using disguises and anagrams to hide himself. He travels through time like the Doctor, but usually wants to do bad things, and hurt people.
Regeneration.
The Doctor has been played by ten actors so far.
In the story, when Time Lords are badly hurt, they "regenerate". When this happens, they look different and they act differently, but they are still the same person. They do this instead of dying, so that they can live longer. A Time Lord can regenerate twelve times in total, when the Master had regenerated twelve times he stole a humans body to keep alive.
