"Desperate Housewives" is a television series in the United States. It can be seen in many other countries, such as the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Israel and Malaysia. The show is shown on ABC in the United States. It is in its fifth season as of 2008.
"Desperate Housewives" is a comedy-drama. It is like a soap opera, but is not because it only has a new episode once a week. The show is about a group of neighbors who live on Wisteria Lane in the made-up town of Fairview.
Season 1.
The show opens with the suicide of Mary Alice Young, a housewife who lives on Wisteria Lane. After that, Mary Alice narrates about her 4 friends: Susan Mayer - a divorced mother who falls in love with her new neighbor Mike Delfino; Bree Van de Kamp - seemingly "the perfect housewife and the perfect mother"; Gabrielle Solis - a former model who married a rich husband, but she has an affair with her teenager gardener; and Lynette Scavo - who has 4 kids and her husband at his work all the time. While they try to be the best mothers and housewives, they try to understand why Mary Alice killed herself, and they find a mysterious letter and a cassette with a recording of Mary Alice that says her real name is Angela.
Season 2.
In season 2 Betty Applewhite,a new neighbour lives in Wisteria Lane with they´re two children Mathew and Caleb, Caleb so his mother thinks killed in Chacago Melanie Foster the girlfriend of Mathew - after the narrator tells that in reality Mathew kills Melanie after a fight he will be killed by the SWAP.Meanwhile Danielle falls in love with him and later they run from home away(before he will be killed). Then Brees husand Rex will be mordered by George Williams a pharmacist, because he loves her very much. Lynette decided to work and her husband Tom must be by theyre kids. At the end of the season Lynette follows Tom to Atlantic City and there she see that he have an affair with Nora Huntington(Lynette didn´t ken her), but then Lynette see that it was a disaccord and theyre happy together. Susan and Mike loves now each other and there will marry but then at the end Orson Hodge crossed with aid him. Gabrielle is pregnant from her gardener John and Carlos and Gaby decided to tease him. After Gabrielles stairs fall she loose the child and they decided to have a surrogate mother because Gaby coudnt have a kid now. The secret is all the time what happens in Chicago as Melanie dies.
