Dildo is a town on the southeastern Dildo Arm of Trinity Bay on the island of Newfoundland, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is about 100 kilometres west-northwest of St. John's. South Dildo is a neighbouring unincorporated community.
General History.
Dildo has a long history, going as far back as 2000 BCE when Maritime Archaic Native Americans resided at Anderson's Cove. By 700 CE Dorset had inhabited Dildo Island.
In 1613, Henry Crout, whilst sailing up Dildo Arm, came in contact with the Beothuks, who were residing on Dildo Island at this time. He traded with them and left gifts.
In 1711 the inhabitants of Trinity Bay were ordered by Governor Crow to leave their homes during the winter, to defend themselves against the French who burned their houses. Dildo Island was one of the places designated for this purpose.
The town of Dildo was founded in the late 1700s and settled to exploit the abundance of marine resources such as fish, whales and seals.
In 1883 the first Waymaster was Albert Smith. The Way Office was changed to a Post Office in 1891.
In 1889 a codfish hatchery was constructed on Dildo Island. It was the largest and most advanced in the world and the first in North America, but due to a lack of government funding it closed in 1897.
In 1891 the first Postmistress was Emma Moore.
In 1932, the German flying boat Do-X, the largest plane in the world at that time, landed in Dildo.
In 1933 a giant squid was discovered by two local residents Reuben Reid and Richard Gosse. The squid was long, and a replica is on display at the local museum.
In 1991 the Gaia, a replica of the "Gokstad ship", visited Dildo on the Vinland Revisited trip, along with descendants of the original Vikings as they retraced their ancestors' voyages to North America.
History of All Saints' Anglican Church.
The first church was built in 1878 by the people of Dildo. It was a simple structure that had no tower and was wide by long. It had a seating capacity of 250 people, and was heated by two coal stoves at either end which shared a common chimney. This Church served the community until 1964 when the present (larger) building was constructed.
As of 2008, the church principals include Rev Canon Shirley Noseworthy and assistant Rev Roger Whalen, Andrew D. Pretty as organist, the sexton is Kevin E. Reid, the people's warden is David W. Pretty, and the minister's warden is Llwelleyn Smith.
Present.
Dildo has a fast-growing tourist industry. Dildo offers picturesque scenery, several bed and breakfasts, eating establishments, the Dildo Museum interpretive centre, the Historic Dildo Days celebration in August, boat tours, the Society of United Fishermen, the Lions centre, several heritage structures, walking trails, many businesses and, of course, the road sign souvenirs.
Dildo won the "Harrowsmith Magazine" Award in 2001 as one of the ten prettiest small towns in Canada.
Dildo has also been featured on CBC's "On the Road Again" and "Land and Sea" as well as a live radio broadcast from the interpretation centre.
In August 2006, Dildo was also the subject of the "What the...?" segment on the Australian television talk show "Rove Live".
Dildo has its own television station, Channel Six.
The town is also mentioned in the song "A Night in Dildo" by The Arrogant Worms
South Dildo.
South Dildo is an unincorporated community with a 1991 population of 272. At the beginning of the 20th century, South Dildo (pop. 205 - July 2008) was primarily involved in lumbering and supplied a schooner to the Labrador fishery. South Dildo had the roadside attraction of a wooden life-size humpback whale head, however after many years it was destroyed at the beginning of the 2006-2007 winter.
