A drive shaft, driving shaft, propeller shaft, or Cardan shaft is a mechanical device for transferring power from the engine or motor to the point where useful work is applied. Most engines or motors deliver power as torque through rotary motion: this is extracted from the linear motion of pistons in a reciprocating engine; water driving a water wheel; or forced gas or water in a turbine. From the point of delivery, the components of power transmission form the drive train.
Drive shafts are carriers of torque: they are subject to torsion and shear stress, which represents the difference between the input force and the load. They thus need to be strong enough to bear the stress, without imposing too great an additional inertia by virtue of the weight of the shaft.
Vehicles.
Most automobiles today use rigid drive shafts to deliver power from a transmission to the wheels. A pair of short drive shafts is commonly used to send power from a central differential, transmission to the wheels.
In British English, the term "drive shaft" is restricted to a transverse shaft which transmits power to the wheels, especially the front wheels. A drive shaft connecting the gearbox to a rear differential is called a propeller shaft, or prop-shaft. A drive shaft connecting a rear differential to a rear wheel may be called a half shaft. The name comes from the fact that two such shafts are required to form one rear axle.
The Slip in Tube Drive shaft is the new type which also helps in Crash Energy Management. It can be compressed in case of crash. It is also known as a collapsible drive shaft.
Motorcycle drive shafts.
Drive shafts have been used on motorcycles almost as long as there have been motorcycles. As an alternative to chain and belt drives, drive shafts offer relatively maintenance-free operation and long life. A disadvantage of shaft drive on a motorcycle is that gearing is needed to turn the power 90° from the shaft to the rear wheel, losing some power in the process. On the other hand, it is easier to protect the shaft linkages and drive gears from dust, sand and mud.
