A dog ("Canis lupus familiaris") is a mammal from the family Canidae. It has been domesticated by humans for a long time. Dogs are used by humans for many different things, for work and as pets. It can be a pet, because it is usually friendly and listens to humans. Dogs are usually said to be ` Mans Best Friend `.
They are sometimes called "canines" from the Latin word for dog - "canis". Sometimes people also use "dog" to refer to other canids, such as wolves. A baby dog is called a pup or puppy. A dog is called a puppy until it is about one year old. Children may call dogs "doggies".
Dogs are sometimes referred to as "man's best friend" because they are kept as domestic pets and are usually loyal and like being around humans.
Appearance and behaviour.
Dogs can smell and hear very well, but can not see well in colour or they are colour blind. Dogs can hear from a distance of 5000 or more meters away.
The usual life span of a dog from pup to an adult is about 10 years or more. The size and the breed of the dog may change how long the dog lives. Smaller dog breeds usually live longer.
Like wolves, wild dogs travel in groups called packs. Packs of dogs are ordered by rank, and dogs with low rank will submit to other dogs with higher rank. The highest ranked dog is called the alpha male. A dog in a group helps and cares about others. Domesticated dogs often view their owner as the alpha male.
Dogs and humans.
Dogs have lived with people for at least 14,000 years. Dogs can serve people in many ways. They are often called "man's best friend". For example, there are guard dogs, hunting dogs, herding dogs, and guide dogs for blind people. There are also dogs that are trained to smell for diseases in the human body or to find bombs or illegal drugs. These dogs sometimes assist policemen in airports or other areas. Sniffer dogs (usually beagles) are sometimes trained for this job. Dogs have even been sent by Russians into outer space, a few years before any human being.
Dog breeds.
There are at least 800 breeds (kinds) of dogs. Dogs whose parents were the same breed will also be that breed: these dogs are called purebred or pure pedigree dogs. Dogs with parents from different breeds no longer belong to one breed: they are called "mutts", "mixed-breed dogs", "hybrids", or "mongrels". Some of the most popular breeds are sheepdogs, collies, poodles and retrievers. It is becoming popular to be breed two different breeds of dogs and calling the new dog's breed a name that is a mixture of the parents' breeds' two names. A puppy with a poodle and a pomeranian as parents might be called a Pomapoo. These kinds of dogs, instead of being called mutts, are known as designer breeds. These dogs are often bred for show, or prize winnings.
