Dudiptsar lake or Dudipat Lake is a beautiful lake encircled by snow clad peaks. The lake lies in the extreme north of Kaghan Valley at N35.0185 E74.0895 and is about a four hours drive from the chief town Naran. The road is not entirely accessible for cars, even Jeeps. From Besal onwards the visitors have to trek about 6-8 hours in vast alpine meadows to reach the lake.
Trek consists of at sometimes steep climb while at other places walk through huge flat valleys, but at all the time filled with amazing sights.
Its water is a beautiful greenish blue and very cold too. Dudipatsar is also close to another major Lake Lulusar which is the main contributory to the Kunhar River that runs through Kaghan valley. At a distance from the lake lies the Babusar Top or the Babusar Pass which is the end of 150 km long Kaghan valley.
The whole area is accessible for four months every year from June-September after which it is closed to snow.
It is highly not advised to track it in snow, as there is a high probability of avalanches in the area. The lake used to have abundance of trout, but illegal fishing using dynamite and nets has resulted in a sharp decline.
The word "dudi" means white and "sar" means lake. This name has been given to the lake because of the white color of snow at surrounding peaks. In summer the water of the lake reflects like a mirror. Getting to the lake takes four to six hours of tough hiking and trekking.
The word "sar" is used with the name of each lake in the area meaning lake. In the summer when the water of the lake reflects like a mirror a large number of visitors from different areas of the country come to watch the enchanting views of these lake.
The whole area is private property but declared national park by Government of Pakistan.
The deep blue Dudipat Sar, at 3,800 meters, is surrounded by green hills at about 4,800 meters, with snow patches in the shady hollows. This lake is very little visited by people and its natural beauty is still very much protected. October 8, 2005's earthquake in North Pakistan has made it more difficult to be accessed. However the government of Pakistan decided on March 14, 2006 to take all steps to restore tourism of the Kaghan valley which includes building new tourism spots and rebuilding previously destroyed ones.
