A movie that is released direct-to-video (also known as made-for-video, straight-to-video, more recently, straight-to-DVD) is one which has been released to the public on home video formats (historically VHS) before or without being released in movie theaters or broadcast on television. The term is also at times used as a insulting term for sequels of movies that are not expected to have financial success.
Reasons for releasing direct-to-video.
Direct-to-video releases can occur for several reasons. Often a production studio will develop a TV show or movie which is not generally released for several possible reasons: poor quality, lack of support from a TV network, controversial nature, or a simple lack of general public interest. Studios, limited in the annual number of movies they grant cinematic releases to, may choose to pull the completed movie from the theaters, or never exhibit it in theaters at all. Studios then recoup some of their losses through video sales and rentals.
In the case of a TV show, low ratings may cause a studio to cancel the show, possibly after having filmed an entire season and aired some episodes. If the show has a considerable fanbase, the studio may release un-aired episodes on video to recoup losses. ' and "Firefly" are examples of canceled shows which were successful cult hits on DVD. Occasionally outstanding DVD sales may revive a canceled show, as in the case of "Family Guy".Originally canceled in 2004,the series was revived in 2005 due partly to its excellent DVD sales.
Direct-to-video releases have historically carried a stigma of lower technical or artistic quality than theatrical releases. Some studio movies released direct-to-video are movies which have been completed but were never released. This delay often occurs when a studio doubts a movie's commercial prospects would justify a full cinema release, or because its "release window" has closed. A release window refers to a timely trend or personality, and missing that window of opportunity means a movie, possibly rushed into production, failed to release before the trend faded. In filmindustry slang such movies are referred to as having been "vaulted."
There is a positive side to direct-to-video releases. They have become something of a lifeline for independent filmmakers and smaller companies.
Direct-to-video releases can be done for movies which cannot be shown theatrically due to controversial content, or because the cost involved in a theatrical release is beyond the releasing company. Almost all pornographic movies are released direct-to-video.
Animated sequels and movie-length episodes of animated series are also often released in this fashion. Salaries for such actors range from $2 to $4 million (Van Damme) to $4.5 to $10 million (Seagal). According to "Variety", ' sold a million copies in one week, despite retaining only two actors from the original trilogy.
In recent years, DVD Premieres have become a substantial source of revenue for movie studios. DVDPs have collectively grossed over $3 billion over the last few years, and have matured enough that DVDP divisions of studios now option their own movies. Studios realized that DVDP movies can be shot on a smaller budget, thus allowing studios larger profits with the combined revenues of home video sales and rentals, in addition to licensing movies for television and for distribution abroad (where some DVDP movies do see theatrical releases).
Distributing DVDPs is not a practice reserved solely for larger Hollywood studios. Several companies, such as The Asylum, MTI Home Video, and York Entertainment distribute DVDPs almost exclusively. The budgets for movies distributed by these companies are even smaller than those of ones distributed by a larger studio, but these companies are still able to profit off their sales.
The V-Cinema and OVA markets in Japan.
In Japan, the direct-to-video movement carries different connotations, being a niche product rather than a fallback medium. Despite having lower budgets than features intended for theater release, Japanese direct-to-video productions are rarely marred by the poor storyline and lower quality production often associated with the DTV market in the US. So-called V-Cinema has more respect from the public, and affection from film directors for the greater creative freedoms the medium allows. DTV releases are subject to fewer content restrictions and less creative dictate than other formats.
In the case of anime, this is called Original Video Animation (OVA or OAV), and their production values usually fall between those of television series and movies. They are often used to tell stories too short to fill a full TV season, and were particularly common in the early 1990s. Sometimes OVAs garner enough interest to justify commissioning a full television series, like "Tenchi Muyo!", "One Piece", and "El Hazard".
With the advent of the 13 episode season format, OVAs are less common now. The majority of OVAs released in today's market are usually continuations or reworkings of recently completed TV series. For instance, the DVD release of a TV series might include a bonus episode that was never broadcast as a sales hook.
