Death Valley is a valley in the U.S. state of California. It is a desert, and it is southeast of the Sierra Nevada mountain range. Death Valley is a part of the Mojave Desert. It is the most important part of Death Valley National Park.
Death Valley has many famous and unusual geographical features in it. Some of these features include sand dunes, salt flats, colorful rocks, and tall mountains. One feature, named Badwater, is the lowest place in North America. It is 282 feet (86 m) below sea level. The salt flats are another famous feature in Death Valley. Salt flats are very unusual. They are large, flattened areas where the surface of the ground is covered by salt instead of dirt. The salt that makes up a salt flat can be many inches or centimeters deep. The salt flats were created because thousands of years ago, Death Valley was underwater. Death Valley was covered by a lake that was named Lake Manly by geologists (scientists who study the Earth). Lake Manly used to be very large, but changes in the weather caused the rivers that brought water into the lake to dry up. After a long time, the water in Lake Manly began to dry up too. As the water dried, it left behind all the minerals that the rivers had brought to it along with their water. As these minerals dried, they created a crust (a brittle outer layer) of salt and other minerals on top of the dirt. Many lakes and seas in other parts of the world are drying up in the same way. The Great Salt Lake in the U.S. state of Utah is one example. The Dead Sea, a sea between the countries of Israel and Jordan is another example of big lakes and seas drying up.
The changes in the weather that made the rivers dry up have not gone away. Death Valley is still very dry. There are less than 2 inches (50 mm) of rain in Death Valley every year. Because Death Valley is so dry all the time, even the dirt that is not covered in salt has become very hard. This means that even though it does not rain often, when it does rain, the dirt cannot absorb all the water quickly enough, and the water can turn into a flash flood (a flood that happens very fast and very violently). In August 2004 there was a very bad flood. The flood damaged many buildings and cars, and killed several people. The flood also destroyed many roads, so nobody could go in or out of Death Valley. Death Valley National Park had to be closed for a long time while the park rangers fixed everything.
Death Valley can be very hot or very cold. In the summer, the temperature can be 130°F (54°C). In the winter, it can be less than 32°F (0°C), and there is often snow. On July 10, 1913, it was 134°F (57°C), which is the hottest recorded temperature in the United States.
Death Valley was named in 1849. Miners and settlers tried to travel across the valley during the California Gold Rush. Many people died because it was so hot and dry. It has very little water because the water evaporates, or disappears in the clouds, before it can touch the ground. This also happens because it is very far under sea level, and the water would have to travel for at least 60 minutes.
