Dajabón is a Dominican province; it is located in the northwestern part of the country, on the border with Haiti. Its capital city has the same name, Dajabón.
It was created on 1938 with the name Province Libertador. It got its present name in 1961. It was part of the Monte Cristi province before being elevated to the category of province.
Location.
Dajabón is bordered to the north by the province of Monte Cristi, to the east by the Santiago Rodríguez and to the south by the Elías Piña province. To the west Dajabón borders the Republic of Haiti.
Origin of name.
The province takes the name from the Taíno name of the region, Dahaboon; it was also the name of the main river of the region (the River Dajabón).
Municipalities.
Dajabón has a total area of 1,020.73km². It has 2.1% of the area of the Dominican Republic and it is ranked as the 23rd (out of 31 plus the National District) largest province.
There are 11 municipalities and 11 municipal districts in the province.
Population.
The municipality had, in 2002, a total population of 7,272: 3,802 men and 3,470 women. The urban population was 20.05% of the total population.
In 2002 (last national census), there were 62,046 people living in the Dajabón province: 31,443 men and 30,603 women. There were 29,218 (47.09%) living in towns and cities. The population density was 61 persons/km².
Geography.
The Cordillera Central ("Central mountain chain") is found in the southern part of the province. The northern part is flat, with many savannas; it is part of the "Yaque del Norte Valley" (or "Línea Noroeste").
Rivers.
The only important river in the province is the River Dajabón, also known as "Masacre" (from French "Massacre"). This river marks the Dominican-Haitian border from the city of Dajabón to its mouth. Other rivers are very short and they are tributaries of the Dajabon or the Artibonite rivers.
Climate.
The climate of the province is a tropical climate, hot most of the year, but it is cooler on the mountains.
Economy.
As in all border provinces in the Dominican Republic, there is little economic development. The trade with Haiti is important, mostly in the city of Dajabón. On the mountains, coffee and beans are important products. Rice and banana are produced in the northern part of the province, and cattle raising is important around the city of Dajabón.
