American English or U.S. English is the dialect (or rather, a variety of dialects) of English language spoken in the United States. It is different in some respects from other variations of English, such as British English. Historically, many types of American English can be traced back to old local dialects of England.
Awareness of American English is greater now in many parts of the world where another form of English is more common. This is partly because of people's exposure to American English via the media, for example CNN television, and the Internet, where the most common form of English is American English.
The increasing global awareness of American English as well as other versions of English may lead to localised versions of English continuing the English language tradition of absorbing new words. For example, the English language spoken in India, which has more than one billion people, will assume more American English words to go along with its British English base and many other words adopted into English usage in India from Indian languages such as Hindi.
Sometimes people will learn American English as it is spoken in America - for example, in telephone call centers in India and other places, people often learn American English in order to sound more like their customers who call India from America. These people frequently continue to use American English in everyday life.
Many word definitions are different in American English. Most languages change starting with minor issues like this - for instance Italian, Spanish, French all came from Latin due to many small usage shifts over centuries.
African American Vernacular English.
"main article: African American Vernacular English (AAVE)
African American Vernacular English is a lect that has features of 16th century English. It originated in Black Culture but may be spoken by members of any group. Its pronunciations and grammar are different from Standard English. It is a "distinct cultural variety" of English, something any non-native English speaker would be familiar with.
It first emerged when blacks were taken en masse from their ancestral homes to North America. Sold into slavery, the captives developed a way to communicate among all their various tribes. In 1996, Linguists proposed using AAVE to educate black children in Oakland, California. They asserted that AAVE is not an Indo-European language. There has been a new awareness of cultural linguistics since.
British English.
British English is the version of the English language which is used in the United Kingdom and some other countries. "British English" is a redundant expression because the English language comes from England, which is a part of Britain.
American English is similar to English with alterations in spellings and usage of some words.
Vocabulary in British English.
In British English, "dock" refers to the water in the space between two "piers" or "wharfs". In American English, the "pier" or "wharf" could be called a "dock", and the water between would be a "slip".
