Equestrianism (Horse riding) is a popular sport in countries like the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia. Horses are ridden in the events of jumping, dressage, stock work, pleasure riding, and other types of horse racing.
Show Jumping.
Show Jumping is where a rider rides a horse over a set course of horse jumps. There are many types of horse jumps such as the double oxer, triple oxer, gates, stone wall, cross rails, cavalvettis, tiger traps, liverpool, corner, and cross country jumps.
Not most every type of horse can jump well, just like not all horses are able to do well at horse racing or farm work. Light weight horses, like the Thoroughbred or Arabian, are mainly used in racing, dressage and jumping. They are horses that are quick to learn new things and act quickly when people give them commands. All these qualities are necessary to win races or show jumping contests.
A horse used to pull a wagon is bigger and heavier than a Thoroughbred. The hooves are also much larger than a racing horse. Large horses are calm, trustworthy and good-natured. Types of heavy horses are: Belgians, Shires, Clydesdale, Friesian horse, and Gypsy Vanners. Also a beginner is able to communicate with these well tempered horses.
Most horses seen in horse show competitions such as show jumping are a mixture of the two types of horses described before. This includes horse breeds such as the Morgan and Quarter Horse.
Dressage.
Dressage is an event where horses do not jump, but must be very obedient to their riders. There is usually a set pattern they must complete. Letters are placed around an arena to show paces in the riding. Also in dressage the horse and rider can perform a freestyle, which is also know as "Dancing on Horseback". (Also in western riding there are freestyles in the reining category) Dressage riders usually wear tight pants called breeches, as well as a blouse, a top coat and a top hat. The moves the horse preforms are very graceful and fun to watch.
Stock work.
Stock work began when horses were ridden on a ranch to round up cows, sheep, or other animals. Today, horse shows also have competitions for horses to show these skills.
Pleasure riding.
Pleasure riding is riding for enjoyment, not for awards. People ride horses on trails in the forest, along quiet roads, or in an arena near their homes or barns. Horse back riding lessons could be considered "Pleasure Riding".Pleausure riding can be called trail riding. Pleasure riding does not have to be for any specific reason, just for fun and enjoyment.
