Echinoderms are a phylum (group) of animals that one can find at all depths of the oceans.
Extinct forms known from fossils include blastoids, edrioasteroids, and several early Cambrian animals such as "Helicoplacus", carpoids, Homalozoa, and eocrinoids such as "Gogia".
Echinodermata is the largest animal phylum which has no freshwater or terrestrial representatives. (no animals in this group live on land or in not-salty water)
Physiology.
Echinoderms evolved from (started out as) animals with bilateral symmetry; later forms were lopsided. Echinoderms' larvae (babies) are ciliated free-swimming organisms that organize in a bilaterally symmetric fashion that makes them look like embryonic chordates. Later, the left side of the body grows at the expense of the right side, which is eventually absorbed. The left side then grows in a pentaradially symmetric fashion, in which the body is arranged in five parts around a central axis (point). (This means they often look like stars.)
All echinoderms exhibit fivefold radial symmetry in portions of their body at some stage of life, even if they have secondary bilateral symmetry. They also have a mesodermal endoskeleton (bones on the outside of their body) made of tiny calcified plates and spines, that forms a rigid support contained within tissues of the organism; some groups have modified spines called pedicellariae that keep the animal free of debris (dirt).
Echinoderms possess a hydraulic water vascular system, a network of fluid-filled canals that function in locomotion, feeding, and gas exchange. They also possess an open and reduced circulatory system, and have a complete digestive tube (tubular gut).
They have a simple radial nervous system that consists of a modified nerve net (interconnected neurons with no central organs); nerve rings with radiating nerves around the mouth extending into each arm; the branches of these nerves coordinate the movements of the animal. Echinoderms have no brain, although some do have ganglia.
The sexes are usually separate. Sexual reproduction typically consists of releasing eggs and sperm into the water, with fertilization taking place externally. (This means that the man and woman echinoderm do not have to touch to have babies.)
Many echinoderms have remarkable powers of regeneration: a sea star cut radially into a number of parts will, over the course of several months, regenerate into as many separate, viable sea stars. A section as small as a single arm (with the commensurate central-body mass and neural tissue) will, in ideal circumstances, successfully regenerate in this way. (This means that if a part of an echinoderm is cut off, it will grow back after a few months.)
