"EarthBound" (called "Mother 2" in Japan) is a console role-playing game made by Ape, Inc. and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System game console. It is the second game in the "EarthBound" series, after "Mother". It has a sequel called "Mother 3".
Setting.
There are many places in the world of "EarthBound". It starts in Eagleland, "EarthBound'"s version of the United States. The player can explore many other areas, including Winters, a snowy country, Dalaam, an oriental land, and Scaraba, an Egyptian-themed land.
Several area from the series have been used in the "Super Smash Bros." series. "Super Smash Bros. Melee" had a level about the first area, Onett, and another level called Fourside. Onett was reused in "Super Smash Bros. Brawl".
Characters.
There are many characters in "EarthBound", but only four main playable characters.
Besides playable characters, there are other important characters.
Storyline.
"EarthBound" takes place in the year 199X (meaning somewhere in 1990 and 1999). Ness is asleep in bed, when a large crash is heard, and wakes him up. He goes to see what it is, and arrives to see a meteor had crashed. His friend, Pokey, tells him to go away because he's bothering the cops, even though the cops are finding him annoying. He returns home, and is awoken by a loud knocking, and Pokey barges in. He tells Ness that his brother is missing, and Ness, Pokey, and Ness' dog King go to the meteor to find Picky. When they go back home, a bee flies out of the meteor, and tells them about the future, Giygas, and that legends say that three boys and a girl would save the world. On their way back to Pokey's house, an alien called Starman Jr. appears and does battle with them. He is defeated, and when Picky and Pokey are returned to their house, their mom is frightened by Buzz Buzz and swats him. This fatally injures him, and before he dies, he gives Ness an item called the Sound Stone, and tells him to find the eight "Your Sanctuary" spots. Ness goes to find these Your Sanctuary spots, as well as the two other boys and the one girl.
Gameplay.
"EarthBound" is a turn-based role-playing game. When in battle, the player can do many different things, including Fight, PSI, Goods, Auto-Fight, and Run Away. Fight has a character use his or her weapon on an enemy, PSI lets the character use PSI if he or she has any to use, Goods lets the player use an item in the selected character's inventory, Auto-Fight lets the computer take control of the characters, and Run Away has a chance to end the battle.
Censorship.
Nintendo removed many things from the English version of "EarthBound". They removed any reference to child abuse, any direct reference to death, the Red Cross logo, and any reference to religion. Despite people thinking the crosses were removed over religious references, they were removed because of Nintendo not wanting to deal with a law suit over it, as it's a copyrighted image.
Cult following.
"EarthBound" and its series has had a strong cult following in and outside of Japan. It has its own web site called Starmen.net, and has had many petitions, including one to release "Mother 1 + 2" in English and one to release "Mother 3" in English. Both of these petitions had very many signatures, but have not been successful.
Later titles.
"EarthBound" was re-released for the Game Boy Advance along with "Mother" as "Mother 1 + 2", only in Japan. It has been rated by the ESRB for release on the Wii's Virtual Console, but it has no release date. It was going to have a sequel on the Nintendo 64 called "EarthBound 64", and it was going to be in 3D. However, after being delayed for many years, it was cancelled. Five years later, "Nintendo" announced that it was being re-released for the Game Boy Advance as "Mother 3", and would feature the same plot and characters.
