Emmanuel College is a chain of Roman Catholic secondary colleges associated with the Marianists. It currently has two campuses, namely the St. Paul's Campus and the Notre Dame Campus, each located in Altona North and Point Cook respectively.
Establishment.
Emmanuel College began as 'St. Paul's College' which was first established in 1965, under the auspices of the American Order of the Society of Marianists. The order had been invited to establish this Catholic Secondary Boys' College by the then Archbishop of Melbourne, Dr. Daniel Mannix. The college's colours were then Red, White and Blue and its motto was "Ecce Mater Tua" (Latin:"Behold Thy Mother").
Original Building Construction.
In the early 1960s, the local parish priests purchased a large, 8 hectare, undeveloped block in Altona North. Through the labour of the parents of the school's initial students, the austere block was transformed into an attractive property. The College's primary edifice, the three-storey Jubilee Building, was completed in 1969. The Chaminade Library was established in 1971. The Generous Art/Craft/Science Lab and the senior classroom building was opened in 1979. The administrative complex and gymnasium were established in 1982 and the Jubille Building was extensively renovated in 1998. In 2004, with the assistance of a Commonwealth Government grant, work commenced on enlarging the library complex and the building of two new computer labs. These developments were completed in 2005 and the College has not undergone any significant renovations since.
Transition To Emmanuel College.
In 2006, the plans for Emmanuel College and the future of the school initiated. In 2007, the college commenced the building of its second campus in Point Cook. 2008 saw the full transition from 'St. Paul's College' to 'Emmanuel College: St. Paul's Campus' including a new uniform, emblem, bag and diary to match the new branding. The previous college motto had also changed to "Life To The Full", which comes from the Gospel according to John: "I have come that they may have life and have it to the full" (John 10:10). The college commenced its education at the new coeducational campus (the building of which had finished being constructed at this stage) named the 'Notre Dame Campus'. The new campus started it's tuition with year 7 education, and will eventually expand to year 7-12 education as the years progress by 2013.
Head Master.
Since 1997, the incumbent principal has been Mr. Christopher Stock (BSc DipEd MEd B.Theol) at the St. Paul's Campus. In 2008 when the transition to Emmanuel College was complete, he became the principal of Emmanuel College, and thus being the principal of two schools; the St. Paul's Campus and the Notre Dame Campus.
Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE).
Emmanuel College has offered the VCE program at the St. Paul's Campus since its implementation in 1990.
The VCE program will be implemented in 2012 at the Notre Dame Campus when it commences it's year 11 education.
