Electric charge is a basic property of electrons, protons and other subatomic particles. Electrons are negatively charged while protons are positively charged. Things that are negatively charged and things that are positively charged pull on (attract) each other. This makes electrons and protons stick together to form atoms. Things that have the same charge push each other away (they "repel" each other). This is called the "Law of Charges". It was discovered by Charles Augustin de Coulomb. The law that describes how strongly charges pull and push on each other is called Coulomb's Law.
Things that have equal numbers of electrons and protons are "neutral". Things that have more electrons than protons are negatively charged, while things with fewer electrons than protons are positively charged. If a person gets a positive or negative charge, it may make the person's hairs stand up because the charges in each hair push it away from the others.
Electric charge felt through static carries usual charges between 25 thousand and 30 thousand volts. However the amps behind these volts is incredibly low and can not cause physical harm to the effected. It is said that static can carry even higher volt charges but once again the amps behind the volts is too small to cause any serious harm.
Historical experiment.
Let a piece of glass and a piece of resin neither of which exhibits any electrical properties, be rubbed together and left with the rubbed surfaces in contact. They will still exhibit no electrical properties. Let them be separated. They wil now attract each other.
1) that the two pieces of glass repel each other.
2) that each piece of glass attracts each piece of resin.
3) that the two pieces of resin repel each other.
These phenomena of attraction and repulsion are called Electrical phenomena and the bodies which exhibit them are said to be 'electrified', or to be 'charged with electricity'.
Bodies may be electrified in many other ways, as well as by friction.
The electrical properties of the two pieces of glass are similar to each other but opposite to those of the two pieces of resin: the glass attract what the resin repels and repels what the resin attracts.
If a body electrified in any manner whatever behaves as the glass does, that is, if it repels the glass and attract the resin, the body is said to be 'vitreously' electrified, and if it attracts the glass and repels the resin it is said to be 'resinously' electrified. All electrified bodies are found to be either vitreously or resinously electrified.
It is the established practice of men of science to call the vitreous electrification positive, and the resinous electrification negative. The exactly opposite properties of the two kinds of electrification justify us in indicating them by opposite signs but the application of the positive sign to one rather than to the other kind must considered as a matter of arbitrary (random choice) convention (agreement), just as it is a matter of convention in mathematical diagrams to reckon poitive distance towards the right hand.
No force, either of attraction or of repulsion (the opposite of attraction), can be observed between an electrified body and a body not electrified.
The above experiment is described by James Clerk Maxwell in his magnum opus (great work) "A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism".
