Editus is a recognized Costa Rican music group formed by Ricardo Ramírez, Edín Solís and Carlos “Tapado” Vargas. They have more than 17 years of experience in the music scene. Their music styles basically are modern and traditional jazz, new age, classical music, and the unique sound of Latin America.
Editus went to over 30 countries in North America, Europe and Latin America to give their performance and even appeared in places like The New York’s Carnegie Hall, The Kennedy’s Center Washington D.C., The Olimpia in Paris, the Montreux Jazz Festival in Switzerland, Monterrey Jazz Festival, Auditorio Nacional and Plaza del Sócalo in Mexico City.
Also they have worked with famous artists like León Gieco, Danilo Pérez, Aterciopelados, Tania Libertad, Armando Manzanero, Pedro Aznar, and Rubén Blades with whom they won the Grammy Award in the year 2000 for the year’s “Best Latin Pop Presentation” for the song called “Tiempos.” Also they got two more prizes again on the categories “Best World Music Album” and “Best Tropical Contemporary Album” for the album “Mundo.”
They have received National Awards like “Ancora” given by “La Nación” newspaper; the National Association of Authors and Musical Composers (ACAM) privileged them as “The group with Best International Projection,” TELETICA named Editus as the “Artist of the Year 2000” and the newspaper “La República” defined this group “Personality of the Year.”
Ricardo Ramírez (violinist).
He was born in November 11th, 1967 in San José, Costa Rica. He is graduated from music of the University of Costa Rica in 1990. He received excellent classes with recognized musicians as Alexander Schneider, Jaime Laredo, Dylana Jenson, León Ara, Andrés Cárdenas, the New World String Quartet, Rubén González and Angel Reyes.
From 1983 to 1988 he was part of the Juvenile Symphonic Costa Rican Orchestra. He won the “Soloist teenagers” contest. In 1989 he worked as a Soloist with the National Symphonic Orchestra. Also with “The Camerana Latinoamericana” in the years 1983, 1987 and 1995.
Nowadays, he and his brothers are part of the “Trio de Cuerdas,” “Akustic Ensamble” as well as Trio “Ménage d Trois” with Martha Fonseca and Bernal Villegas.
He has participated in National Artists performances like “Inconsciente Colectivo,” “Gandhi,” Bernardo Quesada, María Prétiz, Patricia Torres, Duvalier Quirós, Cantoamérica, and Arnoldo Castillo. Out of the country he record productions with “Son Miserables,” “Congreso” group and Alvaro Aguilar.
Edín Solís (Guitarist).
His city of birth is Zarcero. Date of birth: November 22nd, 1963. He is graduated in Classical Guitar from the University of Costa Rica Conservatory. He learned how to play the guitar with the Argentinean teachers Jorge Cardoso and Miguel A. Girolet, a Spanish teacher Demetrio Ballesteros, Francisco Ortíz and Víctor Monge.
In 1991 he won the National Prize Contest of guitar and toured Spain, France, and Germany.
1985-1990: With Cantoamérica Guitarist, traveled to the U.S.A and Guatemala to show their music style.
1991: he went to Europe to give his tour as a Soloist in Paris, Santiago de Compostela in Spain, Bonn and Colonia, both cities of Germany.
Carlos (Tapado) Vargas (Percussionist).
He was born in January 22nd, 1971 in San José, Costa Rica. He is graduated in 1987 from the Castella Conservatory. He studied with the percussionist Giovanny Hidalgo and in the teenager program of the National Symphonic Orchestra.
He is part of the National Symphonic Orchestra and The Juvenile Symphonic Orchestra of Costa Rica. Also he has participated in Marfil, Gaviota y Amarillo and Cian Magenta groups. He has played for Paquita D’Rivera and Victor Monge (known as Serranto), Abraham Laboriel, Alvaro López, Justo Almario, Diego Urcola. He was part of Cantoamérica and Cono Sur and also Probus Ensamble Group. At present, he’s the percussionist of Malpaís, Kool Jazz and Jazz Latino Sextet.
EDITUS: Academy of Arts.
Academy of Arts is an institute based on the experience of Editus, with the purpose of teaching several artistic disciplines with academic excellence. They concentrate the teaching process on the perspective of creativity and improvisation of the modern art. This academy offers an academic program structured as a professional career. The different courses like photography, sound engineering, theater, acrylic paint and others, are taught by important musicians and artistic personalities of Costa Rica.
