The Electric guitar is a type of musical instrument. It was made in 1931 by George Beauchamp. It is a string instrument usually played with a pick and sometimes with the fingers. It uses things called "electric pickups" to convert the vibration of the strings into electric current. This electric current is then sent to an amplifier that changed it to sound. This electric current can also be changed to produce effects.
The main parts of an electric guitar are the neck, the pickups, the tuners, the bridge, the input, the body, the frets, the pick guard, the volume knobs and the tone knobs. There may also be other parts that can change other sounds. A normal electric guitar has one neck with 6 strings on it, although there are 12 string guitars (which produce a unique sound) and guitars with more than one neck.
Guitars are made and sold in many parts of the world by many companies. They can be hand made or factory made/mass produced. Some of the most popular companies that make electric guitar Fender, Gibson and Ibanez. Usually, when people start playing guitar, it is a good idea to buy from a known company.
Starting Out.
When beginning to play the guitar, there are certain basic facts that should be known and certain things to be done.
Buying the first guitar.
When first buying a guitar, it is useful to start with a known brand. There are cheap guitars from good brands that are great to start out on. Many people start out on a Fender Squier. Squier is a type of Fender guitar that does not cost much money.
Reading guitar tablature.
Many guitarists today share their music through a system called tablature (commonly known as 'tab'). Tablature is a way of reading notes for a guitar. It is much simpler than musical notes, but most tabs do not support rhythm. Many tabs can be found online or in books and magazines.
Each line represents a string. Tab is always read as if the player were holding the guitar on their lap, strings facing up. Each number then represents what fret the finger is placed on.
The above diagram would be to play an open E chord, picking each string individually, and then strumming the chord. If the notes are stacked directly above each other, it means to strum the chord.
