Existentialism is a philosophical way of thinking. Ways of thinking about life and ways of thinking about how people understand life is called philosophy. Existentialism is a way of thinking that is very different from many other ways of thinking.
Many religions and philosophies (ways of thinking about the world) say that human life has a meaning (or a purpose). Not to be confused with Nihilism where people believe that human life "does not" have a meaning (or a purpose), people who believe in existentialism think that the world and human life is "absurd". Basically "one must exist before they have essence" Existentialist believe that life may have some sort of meaning, but believe that there is no point in finding it or defining it.
Existentialists believe that our human essence or nature (way of being in the world) is entirely and simply existence (being in the world). This means that the only nature we as humans have is the nature we make for ourselves. As a result of this existentialists think that the actions or choices that a person make are very important. They believe that each person has to decide for themselves what is right and wrong, and what is good and bad.
People who believe in existentialism ask questions like "what is it like to be a human (a person) in the world?" and "how can we understand human freedom (what it means for a person to be free)?" Existentialism is very often associated with negative emotions, such as anxiety (worrying), dread (a very strong fear), and mortality (awareness of our own death).
Famous existentialists.
Famous existentialists include Fyodor Dostoevsky, Jean-Paul Sartre, Friedrich Nietzsche, Søren Kierkegaard,Samuel Beckett, Martin Heidegger, Albert Camus, and Simone de Beauvoir. Many of the major writers were either German, French, or from French African colonies.
Existentialism in movies.
Ingmar Bergman made a movie called "The Seventh Seal" in 1957. This movie was about people who feel lonely and sad, because they cannot fit in.
The movie "Taxi Driver" (which has the actor Robert DeNiro) from 1976 has existential ideas in it. The main character feels sad and lonely, because he cannot understand the world.
