Espaillat is a Dominican province, located in the Cibao region, in the central part of the country. Its capital city is Moca.
It was created on 1885 and it was part of the La Vega province before being elevated to the category of province.
Location.
Espaillat is bordered to the east by the province of Hermanas Mirabal, to the south by La Vega, to the west by the Santiago and Puerto Plata provinces. The María Trinidad Sánchez province is to the northwest of the Espaillat province and the Atlantic Ocean is to the north.
Origin of name.
The province was named after "Ulises Francisco Espaillat" who was President of the Dominican Republic for a short period of time (April 1876 - October 1876).
Municipalities.
Espaillat has a total area of 838.62 km². It has 1.7% of the area of the Dominican Republic and it is one of the smallest provinces in the country, ranked as the 27th (out of 31 plus the National District) largest province.
There are four municipalities and eleven municipal districts in the province.
Population.
In 2002 (last national census), there were 225,091 people living in the Espaillat province, and just 84,970 (37.75%) living in towns and cities. The population density was 268 persons/km², one of the highest in the country.
Geography.
There are three geographic regions in the province. They are, from north to south: the Atlantic coastal plains close to the Atlantic Ocean, the Cordillera Septentrional and the Cibao Valley.
Mountains.
The Cordillera Septentrional ("Northern mountain chain") is found in the north central part of the province but the mountains here are not very high. The highest mountain in the province is the "El Mogote" at 970 metres above sea level.
Rivers.
There are only short rivers in the province. The most important river that flows into the Atlantic Ocean, and the longest of the province, is the Yásica river; it forms the limit with the Puerto Plata province. Other important rivers that flow to the north are the Jamao and Veragua rivers which are tributaries of the Yásica river.
In the southern part of the province, the rivers are very short and most of them are tributaries of the Licey river (a tributary of of the Yuna river). Besides the Licey river, other rivers are Moca and Bacuí.
Climate.
The climate of the province is a tropical climate, hot most of the year, but it is cooler on the mountains.
Economy.
The main economic activity of the province is agriculture and the main products are plantain, cassava, coffee and cacao.
Tourism is a very important activity on the Atlantic coast, with many hotels in the region.
