El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO in short) is a term describing a natural event that occurs in the Pacific Ocean. The terms "El Niño" and "La Niña" also describe this natural event. "El Nino" and "La Nina" are English words for the Spanish words "El Niño" and "La Niña". In Spanish they mean the "little boy" and the "little girl". El Niño is related to temperature changes in surface waters of the tropical Pacific Ocean. Every two to five years the Pacific Ocean endures a fluids mechanic phenomenon called El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO). El Nino Spanish for
“the child” describes the infant Jesus Christ; initially referring to a weak, warm current appearing annually around Christmas time along the coast of Ecuador and Peru and lasting only a few weeks to a month or more. Every three to seven years, an El Niño event may last for many months, having significant economic and atmospheric consequences worldwide. Australia and Southeast Asia experience drought and deserts of Peru experience torrential rainfall and East Africa can experience both. The effects of El Niño are felt worldwide in changing weather patterns and in the resulting economic consequences. By the early 1980s it was evident that El Niño and the Southern Oscillation were related, and the acronym ENSO described this large-scale analysis interannual climate phenomenon.
El Niño refers to an anomalous large-scale analysis warming in the equatorial eastern and central Pacific Ocean. Scientists began to realize that this warming was intimately linked to an atmospheric phenomenon referred to the Southern Oscillation discovered by “Sir Gilbert Walker in 1923”. The Southern Oscillation is, in simple terms, a "seesaw" of atmospheric pressure between the Pacific and Indian oceans. The clearest sign of the oscillation is the inverse relationship between the air pressure measured at two sites: Darwin, Australia, in the Indian Ocean and the island of Tahiti in the South Pacific. The Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) is the difference in sea-level pressure measured at Darwin and Tahiti, while the Cold Tongue (CT) Index measures how much the average sea-surface temperature in the central and eastern Pacific near the equator varies from the annual cycle displayed in the diagram below. It is evident that the two indices are anti-correlated, so that a negative SOI is usually accompanied by an anomalously warm ocean known as El Nino.
The Southern Oscillation Index (red line) is the sea-level pressure measured at Tahiti minus that measured at Darwin. The CT Index (blue) is the anomaly in the sea-surface temperature averaged over the region between 5° south and 5° north, and between the Date Line and 90° west. Characteristics from observations have been that events last 12 to 18 months and could happen every two to seven years. The following features also seem to be common to most ENSO events. Quasi-stationary anomalies in the sea-surface temperature SST in the eastern and central Pacific relaxation of the trade winds easterly winds in the tropical Pacific associated with positive SST anomalies at the onset of the event with deepening in the east and a shallowing in the west of the thermocline along the equator. The thermocline is the zone at the top of the ocean in which the water temperature decreases rapidly with depth.
