The federal government of the United States has three branches of government; the legislature, executive, and judiciary.
Executive branch.
The executive branch is the part of the government that enforces the law. Members of the U.S. Electoral College elect a President who is the leader of the executive branch, as well as the leader of the Armed Forces. The President decides whether or not the bills that the Legislative branch passes will become laws, and the President may veto any bill. The President may also make "executive orders" to ensure that people follow the law. Two of the most famous executive orders were President Abraham Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation and President Dwight D. Eisenhower's order to send 1,200 soldiers from the 101st Airborne Division to allow the Little Rock Nine into a school that refused to admit African Americans students. The President is in charge of many departments that control much of the day-to-day business of government. For example, Department of Commerce makes rules about trade and business. The President chooses the heads of these departments, and also nominates judges at the federal (nation-wide) level. However, the Senate, part of the legislative branch, must agree with all of the people the President chooses. The President may serve two 4-year terms, making 8 years in all.
Judicial Branch.
The third branch of government is the Judicial branch. The Judiciary is made up of courts -- Supreme, Circuit, the magistrate (local) and municipal (city) courts. The Judicial branch interprets the laws.
The state judges are elected by the citizens rather than being appointed. They also run for their office as members of a political party.
Protecting individual rights granted by the state constitution;
Determing the guilt or innocence of those accused of violating the criminal laws of the state;
Acting as a check upon the legislative and executive branches of state government.
The Supreme Court of Appeals is the highest court in West Virginia and supervises the lower courts. It is comprised of five judges who are elected for twelve year terms by the voters. The Supreme Court is required to meet twice a year, in January and in September, and may hold special terms when necessary. The Supreme Court has the authority to determine if state laws and actions of state officials, including the Governor, are constitutional. Laws and executive orders cannot be enforced if they violate the state constitution.
Most cases brought before the Supreme Court are appeals that have been tried in the circuit or magistrate courts. Once a decision has been made by the Supreme Court that is the final decision, with the exception of conflicts between state and federal laws, which may be appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Of the five Supreme Court justices, one is selected to be the Chief Justice. The selection process is a rotation between the five justices, each who serve as the chief justice for one year. The Chief Justice's duties include submitting a budget to the Legislature, and according to the state constitution, the Supreme Court will be appropriated for whatever amount it requests. The Chief Justice also assigns justices to write opinions and decisions of the Court.
The federal government of the United States is the centralized United States government that is established by the United States Constitution. The federal government has three branches: the legislature, executive, and judiciary. Through a system of separation of powers or "checks and balances", each of these branches has some authority to act on its own, some authority to influence the other two branches, and is influenced by the other branches. The policies of the federal government have a broad influence on both the domestic and foreign affairs of the United States. But the powers of the federal government as a whole are limited by the Constitution, which leaves a great deal of authority to the individual states.
The seat of the federal government is in the federal district of Washington, D.C.
