Fellatio is oral sex on the penis of a man, as opposed to cunnilingus, oral sex on a woman. Fellatio is commonly called a blow job.
Fellatio can continue until a man ejaculates or as part of foreplay, before actual sexual intercourse.
Risks.
There is no risk of getting pregnant by performing a fellatio, because there is no connection form the mouth to the womb and the fallopian tubes. There is however a significant risk of transmitting diseases if the mouth comes in contact with semen on the penis. Exposing the cells in the mouth to alcoholic drinks can increase this risk. HIV can also enter through open sores or bleeding gums.
Very few people are allergic to semen. Nancy Friday's book, "Men in Love - Men's Sexual Fantasies: The Triumph of Love over Rage" claims that swallowing ejaculate is high on the intimacy scale.
Diseases such as Chlamydia, human papillomavirus (HPV), gonorrhea, herpes, hepatitis (multiple strains), and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), as well as viruses such as HIV, can be transmitted through oral sex. The risk of transmitting HIV through fellatio is unknown,but it is suspected to be low. Any kind of direct contact with body fluids of a person infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, poses a risk of infection. The risk from most of these types of infection, however, is generally considered far lower than that associated with vaginal or anal sex.
If the receiving partner has wounds on their genitals, or if the giving partner has wounds or open sores on or in their mouth, or bleeding gums, this poses an increased risk of STD transmission. Brushing the teeth, flossing, undergoing dental work, or eating crunchy foods such as potato crisps relatively soon before or after giving fellatio can also increase the risk of transmission, because all of these activities can cause small scratches in the lining of the mouth. These wounds, even when they are microscopic, increase the chances of contracting STDs that can be transmitted orally under these conditions. Such contact can also lead to more mundane infections from common bacteria and viruses found in, around and secreted from the genital regions. Because of this, some medical professionals advise the use of condoms when performing or receiving fellatio with a partner whose STD status is unknown. Flavoured condoms may be used for this purpose.
In culture.
Many people accuse someone of performing fellatio as an insult. For example 'cock sucker!' or 'suck my dick'.
Many cultures see fellatio as showing control over ones partner, as often the giver is on their knees. In ancient Greece it was called "playing the flute" The Moche people of ancient Peru practiced it regularly and made vases showing it.
