A Fuel cell converts hydrogen into electricity by chemically binding it to oxygen, from which results water. It is like a battery that is constantly fed with fuel. It is an important part of the hydrogen economy. Note, though, that, unlike oil, hydrogen which is not found in nature and is not an energy source, but an energy carrier. It has to be produced first, and if this is done by burning fossil fuels, it does not help against climate change in today. but, fuel cell will help against climate change in future, because scientists try to find new way to make hydrogen without using fossil fuels.
How to get energy.
Water is a molecule that consists of one oxygen atom and two hydrogen atoms. It takes energy when separating into oxygen and hydrogens. And it releases energy when they are recombined. A fuel cell does the latter. Hydrogen (the energy source) and oxygen (which can come in the form of plain air) are fed into it, separated by a screen that will only let positively charged hydrogen (H+) through to the oxygen (O). At the hydrogen side, a platinum plate helps the electrons of the hydrogen atoms to split off (it acts as a catalyst). The now positively charged hydrogen atoms pass through the screen, while the electrons enter an electric circuit. This produces the electricity required. At the other end of the electrical circuit, it connects to the oxygen side, where the electrons then combine with the positively charged hydrogen and the oxygen to form water (which then comes out the exhaust pipe). These three (H+, O and electrons) 'want' to combine and thus 'pull' the electrons through the electric circuit, thus creating the desired energy.
Efficiency.
Fuel cell make electricity by reacting oxygen and hydrogen. Efficiency is very good(about 40~60%).It also elevate efficiency maximum 80% if exhausting heat is used during reacting process. Moreover, Fuel cell can use various fuel, for example, natural gas, methanol, LPG(Liquid Petroleum Gas), naphtha, kerosene etc. Because it is easy not only to gain energy source but also not to burn a fuel, fuel cell is future energy contributing environment conservation.
Feature.
There are general feature of fuel cell. First, it is possible to develop efficiency highly. Because of higher efficiency than caloric power generation, fuel cell can reduce price of source. Futhermore, emission of NOx, CO2(carbon dioxide) is respectively 1/38, 1/3 lower than coal, caloric power generation. Noise is also very little.
Second, it is advantageous to determine location. It can be located in the center of city. So fuel cell plant is economically provided with energy.
Fuel cell is classified by a type of inner electrolyte. For instance, phosphoric acid fuel cell is for low temperature. It is used cell phone, automobile power supply to require high current state because it has a good safety. Alkali fuel cell usually consist of K(OH)2(pottasium hydroxide). Methanol fuel cell is used by reacting methanol electrochemistrically. This fuel cell is good for simplifying system. But methanol fuel cell is low output density because its reacting rate is slow.
Types of Fuel Cells.
Phosphoric Acid fuel cell (PAFC) - Phosphoric acid fuel cells are commercially available today.
Proton Exchange Membrane fuel cell (PEM) - These fuel cells operate at relatively low temperatures (about 175°F), have high power density, can vary their output quickly to meet shifts in power demand, and are suited for applications, such as in automobiles, where quick startup is required.
Molten Carbonate fuel cell (MCFC), Solid Oxide fuel cell (SOFC), Alkaline fuel cell (AFC),Direct Methanol fuel cell (DMFC), Regenerative fuel cell, Zinc Air fuel cell (ZAFC), Protonic Ceramic fuel cell (PCFC), Microbial fuel cell (MFC)
Applications.
There are many uses for fuel cells — right now, all of the major automakers are working to commercialize a fuel cell car. Fuel cells are powering buses, boats, trains, planes, scooters, forklifts, even bicycles. There are fuel cell-powered vending machines, vacuum cleaners and highway road signs. Miniature fuel cells for cellular phones, laptop computers and portable electronics are on their way to market. Hospitals, credit card centers, police stations, and banks are all using fuel cells to provide power to their facilities. Wastewater treatment plants and landfills are using fuel cells to convert the methane gas they produce into electricity. Telecommunications companies are installing fuel cells at cell phone, radio and 911 towers. The possibilities are endless.
