Fahrenheit (Traditional Chinese: 飛輪海; Pinyin: Fēi Lún Hǎi) is a Taiwanese boy band. Fahrenheit has been a great success around Asia, particularly in Taiwan, China and Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia and Japan. The group has four members: Calvin Chen, Jiro Wang, Wu Zun and Aaron Yan. They record albums with HIM International Music record label.
Background and Members.
The name Fahrenheit comes from each of the members representing a season or temperature matching their different personalities. Calvin Chen represents spring, warmth; Jiro Wang represents summer, hot; Wu Zun represents autumn, cool; and Aaron Yan represents winter, cold. Each of the four members also has a temperature symbolising them on the Fahrenheit scale: Calvin is at 77 degrees, Jiro is at 95 degrees, Wu is at 59 degrees and Aaron is at 41 degrees.
Wu was born and raised in Brunei for most of his life, later graduating at RMIT in Melbourne, Australia. He was entered the entertainment business while on a trip to Taiwan, when a television producer discovered him during this trip and recommended him to play the lead male role of Tokyo Juliet, which he accepted.
Aaron moved to New York, America at a young age but later returned to Taiwan for high school and college at Chinese Culture University. Around early 2005, Comic producers had been searching for good bloggers on the Internet. They discovered him, who at that time, was popular online, and thus recommended him to go casting for a role in a TV show.
After Calvin finished high school in Taiwan, he studied in university in Canada, where he completed his masters degree in Economics at University of Victoria. He then further continued his life in Vancouver by joining the pageant-like competition Sunshine Boyz, where he won first place with a free ticket to Taiwan and a contract with a music company, as well as a role in a TV drama.
Jiro graduated in Taiwan's Fu-Shin College. He was first asked to join the entertainment industry from a singing competition. But he failed to release an album because of company difficulties, so he decided to continue his career in the industry by working backstage, mainly in fashion designing and modeling. He was approached again around 2004, when his acting career began.
Although unsure at first, Fahrenheit first gained great fame around 2005 when all of the members first starred in the series KO One on television in Taiwan. Because it felt awkward to have only three members in a boyband, Wu Zun joined the group later in late 2005. On 28 December 2005, Fahrenheit officially became a quartet boy band.
