Formula One, or F1, is a type of race-car driving. Teams compete in a series of Grand Prix races, held in different countries around the world. Some of the most popular races are held in Monaco, Japan, Italy and Britain. The cars are very fast, making speeds of up to 370 kilometers per hour. The championship has been won many times by
different teams- Mclaren, Ferrari and Williams. Teams can consist of as many as 600 people, who all come together every race weekend, and using each of their individual expertise try to obtain the maximum result - a victory. The winning driver and team each gain ten points towards the drivers and constructor's championship. Teams consist of drivers, test drivers, a team principal, mechanics, engineers, designers and aerodynamicists to name a few of the team personnel. Winning a race takes a good qualifying position, flawless strategy, perfect pitstops and a fast car.
Drivers are paid huge salaries to risk their lives every time they step into the cockpit. Like all types of motoracing, the dangers associated with formula one are great. So much so, that there are many safety measures. Drivers wear 4 layers of flameproof overalls, made of a fire resistant material called Nomex. A drivers helmet must be able to resist an 800 degree celsius flame for at least 45 seconds, as well 100s of Gforces. the helmets can be driven over by trucks with no damage being done to them. Carbon fibre is the ideal material for the bodywork of formula one cars - which are very expensive to build and repair. The design of cars differs from team to team. Each team has two entries into the championship which means two cars to build, plus a spare car. The current tyre suppliers are Bridgestone - making sure every car has the right tyre for the differing weather conditions. Wet weather driving is considered a skill in formula one, as the cars are slowed down considerably.
The body that runs Formula One, the FIA, is based in France. Although Formula One is a 'billion dollar business', a drop in viewership and attendance figures at races has prompted the FIA to make a number of rule changes in recent years. these changes are meant to make the races more interesting, so more people watch.
