Franklins is a cheap supermarket company that can be found all over the state of New South Wales in Australia. It used to have shops all over Australia.
The name of the shops is named after Frank Lindstrom, who started Franklins in 1941 in the city of Sydney in Australia. The shops had been cheap from the start, created in a time when other supermarkets were also cheap, simply by cutting back on what was keeping the shops expensive. It grew to cover much of New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and South Australia with a reputation for low prices on groceries. It claims to be "Australia's Original Discount Grocer".
Franklins was the first supermarket in Australia to have brand name products. These products are called No Frills. In fact, the company's shops only sold these products when it first came about. It started out with a few products but now they have 800 products. This ranges from everything from bread to window cleaners. Today, a mascot of Franklins called Red Sock advertises these products.
Franklins offers a wide range of products including No Frills. Franklins mostly deals in food and everyday articles. But some stores also sell a wider range of fresh food articles than Aldi ever had. It even has Franklins brand name products like bread and meat.
A wide range of people shop at Franklins to buy a wide range of articles. In some shops, people can buy their food and everyday articles at Franklins. They can then buy their fresh food outside of the store. In other stores, people can get fresh food articles as well as food and everyday articles all in the one place. Franklins even has a 'bottle shop' inside a few stores where people can get their beer and wine from. These places are both cheap and convenient to shop in.
When Franklins first started, their business philosophy was like Aldi's: "No extras, no service, no music and no electronic cash - only articles at extremely low prices" or as Franklins had put it: "Strictly No Frills". Because of big competition with other "good-looking" shops, it no longer follows this philosophy, instead making the articles cheaper and cheaper.
Franklins is still cheap but Coles and Woolworths are also becoming cheaper. This is why Franklins was less profitable over the years. When Aldi came to Australia, Franklins went broke and almost disappeared. Today, Franklins is owned by the Pick n Pay supermarket company from the country of South Africa. It has opened "Franklins Family Supermarkets" in 2006, independently franchise shops of both Franklins and Pick n Pay.
