A fracture is the separation of a body into two, or more, pieces under the action of stress.
The word "fracture" is often applied to bones of living creatures, or to crystals or crystalline materials, such as gemstones or metal. Sometimes, in crystalline materials, individual crystals fracture without the body actually separating into two or more pieces.
When there is a closed fracture there is no broken skin. The bones which broke do not penetrate the skin (but may be seen under the skin) and there is no contusion from external trauma.
A comminuted fracture has more than two fragments of bone which have broken off. It is a highly unstable type of bone fracture with many bone fragments.
This is where the bone has been completely fractured through it's own width. This is opposite from a hairline fracture or incomplete bone fracture where there is only a "crack" and not a complete break.
This type of fractured bone severely damages the soft tissue which surrounds the bone.
When this occurs, the bone breaks and fragments of the bone will penetrate through the internal soft tissue of the body and break through the skin from the inside. There is a high rise of infection if external pathogenic factors enter into the interior of the body.
The pathology of this type of fracture includes a incomplete fracture in which only one side of the bone has been broken. The bone usually is "bent" and only broken of the outside of the bend. It is mostly seen in children and is considered a stable fracture due to the fact that the whole bone has not been broken. As long as the bone is kept rigid healing is usually quick.
This bone fracture has minimal trauma to the bone and surrounding soft tissues. It is a incomplete fracture with no significant bone displacement and is considered a stable fracture.. In this type the fracture the crack only extends into the outer layer of the bone but not completely through the entire bone. It is also known as a Fissure Fracture.
In this type of fractured bone there are several fracture lines on one bone. It can also mean several fractures in one patient but on separate bones but generally due to the same injury. Generally due to traumatic injuries, this will be evident in a patient who has a fractured pelvis and clavicle due to a fall or hit by a car.
This type of fracture classified as when a broken bone protrudes to the exterior of the body giving rise to soft tissue injuries of the muscles, tendons and ligaments. There is a high risk of injection to the internal tissues.
A simple bone fracture is one of the better types of fractures as there is only bone damage with little or no soft tissue damage and the broken bone ends do not penetrate the skin.
