Food is material of animal or plant origin, eaten by living things to provide energy and nutrition. Food contains the nutrition that people need to be healthy. People need to eat protein, carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals to be healthy. Liquids used for energy and nutrition are often called "drinks".
Food for humans is mostly made through farming or gardening, and includes animal and vegetable sources. Some people refuse to eat food from animal origin, like meat, eggs and products with milk in them. Not eating meat is called vegetarianism. Not eating or using any animal products is called veganism).
Food produced by farmers or gardeners can be transformed by industrial processes (the food industry). Processed food usually contains several natural ingredients and food additives (such as preservative, antioxidants, emulsifiers, flavour enhancers, etc.).
At home, food is prepared in the kitchen, by the cook. The cook sometimes uses a cookbook. Examples of cooking utensils are pressure cooker, pot, and pan.
Food can also be prepared and served in restaurants (often workers, or in the evening for entertainment) or refectory (in particular for kids in school).
The utensils used may be a plate, knife, fork, chopsticks, spoon, bowl, or spork.
Most people do not grow their own food, so they have to buy food that was grown by someone else. People buy most of their food in stores, shops, or markets. But some people still grow most or all of their own food.
People may buy food and take it home to cook it, or buy food that is ready to eat from a street vendor, or in a restaurant.
Food-related issues.
Food shortage is still a big problem in the world today. Many people do not have enough money to buy the food that they need. Bad weather or other problems sometimes destroy the growing food in one part of the world. When people do not have enough food, we say that they are hungry. If they do not eat enough food for a long time, they will become sick and die from starvation. In areas where many people do not have enough food, we say that there is famine there.
Food can make people sick if it is contaminated by micro-organisms, heavy metals, or chemicals.
If people do not eat the right foods, they can become sick.
If people do not eat enough protein, they get the disease called kwashiorkor.
If they do not eat enough vitamin B1 (thiamine), they get the disease called beriberi.
If people eat too much food, they can become overweight or obese. This is also bad for people's health.
Food in religions.
Many cultures or religions have food taboos. That means they have rules what people should not eat, or how the food has to be prepared. Examples of religious food rules are the "Kashrut" of Judaism and the "Halal" of Islam, which say that pig meat cannot be eaten.
