A flower is a part of a plant. Flowers are also called the bloom or blossom of a plant. It sometimes has a stem - a thin pipe - to support the flower. Flowers have petals. The word "flower" is usually used only for the part that produces seeds.
In many plants, a flower is its most colourful part. We say the plant 'flowers', 'is flowering' or 'is in flower' when this colourful part begins to grow bigger and open out.
There are many different kinds of flowers in different areas in the world. Even in the coldest places, for example the Arctic, flowers can grow during a few months.
the reproductive structure found in flowering plants (plants of the division Magnoliophyta, also called angiosperms).
For plants.
Flowers contains the reproductive organs of a plant. Many flowers are dependent upon the wind to move pollen between flowers of the same species. Other plants rely on insects or bees to move pollen. The role of flowers is to produce seeds. After the seeds are fertilized, portions of the flower develop into a fruit, which contains the seeds. Plants use seeds to disperse (spread) the plant across the landscape.
As decoration.
Flowers have long been admired and used by humans. Most people think that flowers are beautiful. Many people also love flowers for their fragrances (scents). People enjoy seeing flowers growing in gardens. People also enjoy growing flowers in their backyards, outside their homes. People often wear flowers on their clothes or give flowers as a gift during special occasions, holidays, or rituals, such as the birth of a new baby (or a Christening), at weddings (marriages), at funerals (when a person dies). People often buy flowers from businesses called florists.
As a name.
Some parents name their children after a flower. A couple of common flower names are: Rose, Lily and Daisy.
As food.
People also eat some types of flowers. Flower vegetables include broccoli, cauliflower and artichoke. The most expensive spice, saffron, comes from the crocus flower. Other flower spices are cloves and capers. Hops flowers are used to flavor beer. Dandelion flowers are often made into wine.
Honey is flower nectar that has been collected and processed by bees. Honey is often named for the type of flower that the bees are using (for example, clover honey). Some people put flowers from nasturtiums, chrysanthemums, or carnations in their food. Flowers can also be made into tea. Dried flowers such as chrysanthemum, rose, jasmine are used to make tea.
Special meanings.
Some people think that some flowers have special meanings. Lilies make people think of life. Red roses make people think of love, beauty, and passion. Poppies make people think of making people feel better after people have died. In Britain, Australia and Canada, red poppies are worn to remember the soldiers who have died in wars. Daisies make people think of children and innocence.
