The February Revolution (Russian: Февральская Революция/Fevralskaya Revolyuziya) of the year 1917 was a revolution that ended Tsarist rule, replacing it with a Provisional Government. The name goes back to the Julian calendar then valid in Russia. Direct causes of the February revolution were the effects of the First World War, which strengthened the social tensions of the Vorkriegszeit additionally.
Industrialisation and workers.
The industrialisation to be called already therefore in front place, since the events of the year 1917, which go out from "Petrograd" (called saint Petersburg since August of 1917), particularly in the cities took place. The defeats of the Tsar against England and France in the Krimwar of the years 1854/56 had shown that a fundamental economic and social renewal of the tsarist realm was necessary. Followed the large reforms, which the abolition of the body characteristic in the year 1861, which judicial reform in the year 1864 and the mechanism of autonomy organs on Gouvernementebene, which was called Semstwos, in the year 1864. In addition not least a strategy belonged for the setting up to its own heavy industry, as it gave it in England.
Economic crisis and socio-economic and cultural change.
The "Russian state" went through an enormous economic crisis during the war. The requirements of the modern war were overslept by the Tsar completely, this made an enormous development of the industrial capacities of the country. This was also accomplished with national assistance. However this demanded its tribute in an enormously high capital expenditure. These expenditures were covered by the state. In order to provide again for incomes, a series of war loans was released, which failed however. In the absence of other methods thereby the Notenpresse had to hold for the expenditures for war.
The economic, social and administrative change was at least in the cities with a kind "cultural modernization". To come to carry a country like the tsarist Russia, which got ready to itself to develop a competitive industry in order the necessary requirements of the war against, the law conformity by a law system up-to-date and to improve by decentralization the efficiency of the regional administrations and/or administrations, this required a clear increase of the width qualification. These applied at this time as progressive, at them aligned many their life goals and habits. The cultural modernization, to which also the emergence of a journalistic public belonged, ran out with all slavophilen return flows on a go-west, up to the Rezeption and most independent developments of the new styles within the ranges of the literature and art. An intelligence in such a way specified enstand, which was for reforms unlocked and less and less ready to be able to be limited in its public acting of a pervasive state. It would be from today's viewpoint wrong to equate the Inteligenz and opposition only quite had „intelligently “and „in a revolutionary manner “not the same meaning.
Agriculture in Tsar-Russia.
Of Russia national economy it was at present around the year 1916 still in a so high agriculturally that it could not give a revolution without the farmers. From demographic explosion sinking agrarian productivity findings were confronted to the old, still from a fewer time coming scenario of a vicious circle, which pointed Moscow at least in the region on a market-focused region in Russia.
Agrarian social protest was usually spontaneous and short-lived - not only in Russia -. The farmers returned again to their hut, if they had taken themselves, which they wanted. Like that it was in the hot autumn of the yearly 1905, and such a scenario took place just as in the late summer of the yearly 1917 again. It remained completely calm after beginning of war in the year 1914. Since the large majority of the recruits came from villages, there was here hardly still someone, which could itself have raised against the authority.
With all that the question remains openly, why farmers revolted of course within living memory against their direct gentlemen, but this never together with intelligence, had done. Only this new connection, between the farmers in the rural regions and the Inhabitans in the cities, lent revolutionary quality to the agrarian social protest. To all appearances the outbreak of the revolution with long-term changes has to do.
Defeats in the First World War.
The war brought Russia losses of more than a million dead one. The war had begun, as in all European states, with a national high feeling. It was coined/shaped for the Zarenreich however after the turn at the east front with the battle by Gorlice Tarnow of the yearly 1915 to a series of sensitive defeats. The legitimacy of the autocracy of the tsarist house Romanow was weakened still by the fact that Nikolaus II. 1915 had taken over personally the command over the armed forces and thus each further retreat and each further defeat damaged the reputation of the regime.
All this long and medium-term desintegrativen and conflict-laden developments accepted, under the additional load of the war, a new quality. In synchronischer Verschlingung its effect on the displeasure multiplied workers and farmers. The Aufwallung of national unanimity (Burgfrieden), which it in the August of the yearly 1914 also in tsarist Russia gave, held not for a long time. At the latest in the September of the yearly 1915, when the Zar sent the parliament once more home, the tensions solidified themselves to contrasts, which hardly still permitted a compromise under keeping of the internal peace.
Authority loss of the Zaren and embittering the opposition.
Zar Nikolaus II. instructed the murder of political opponents and installed at short notice an informer system generally speaking for country. In the year 1915 he transferred the military instruction over the troops of the First World War, after there was it for the tsarist army disgraceful defeats. At the Petersburger Blutsonntag it let its secret police and the military shoot at demonstrators, suffocated each rebellion in the germ. Finally Nikolaus had to permit a choice nevertheless to the Duma. Nikolaus ignored the advice of his former Minister of Finance Sergei Juljewitsch Witte, which snapped him and recommended comprehensive reforms, to a large extent. In addition it broke several times arbitrarily the condition. The beginning of the First World War represented then the beginning of the end. The frequent defeats, hunger emergencies and the catastrophic supply situation of the population led in the long run to the revolution. By the bad states the agreed upon Burgfrieden, which should secure only a keeping still of the opposition within the war, broke quite fast. The increasing protest readiness of the population shows up in the Duma, which were dominated by representatives of the middle class and the aristocracy. In the Duma formed since 1915 „the progressive block “, which reflected embittering over the autocratic policy Nikolaus' II. „The progressive block “was the strongest parliamentary opposition since the revolution of 1905.
Resignation of the Czar.
After the dissolution the key of the fate of the crumbling regime was appropriate for the government at the army, whose supreme command of the Zar had transferred against the advice of its closest environment in the August of the yearly 1915 and whose headquarters was at the war front in the far Mogilew. From here from beorderte Nikolaus II. a quite impressive (and to failure doomed not from the beginning) armed force after Petrograd, for the protection of its family into the summer residence Zarskoje Selo and to the Wiederherstelung of the old order in the capital. The combat patrol came to Zarskoje Selo and turned around then suddenly - not because the reconditions seemed insurmountable, but because the Zar had given by telegraph instruction to wait.
Because Nikolaus had made itself in the meantime on the way the combat patrol. Its special train was intercepted however by the new Petrograder ruling powers and rerouted after Pskow, in the headquarters of the north front. Here the conclusion act of the tragedy of the Zaren Nikolaus carried out itself. Still in the evening of the 1. March of the yearly 1917 had agreed the Zar on urge of the present generals finally one „government of the social confidence “. But a call of the Dumapräsidenten instructed those of military about the fact that the time had long overhauled such a lean concession. Thus they pushed their commander in chief to the abdication. This made at the same time a decision, which should seal the end of the monarchy at all only in paternal welfare service. He resigned also in the name of his blood-ill son under age and only. Since his brother Mikhail rejected it offered crown, the early one of the 3 went into. March of the yearly 1917 with the regency Nikolaus' and the rule of the Romanow dynasty and the Russian monarchy at the same time the era of the tsarist double eagle to end.
Beyond that the revolutionary did the next, logical step and formed a new executive. But the two centers of power had to agree. In the victory was easy the compromise overshot comparatively. The Menschewiki in the worker and soldier advice left the precedence to the Duma liberals. This renouncement stood in conformity with their executives with their orthodox--Marxist ideology, which assumed that that follow the feudalistischen monarchy a civil-capitalistic democracy, therefore the liberal middle class the field to belong had.
So were rather the military and particularly radical Deputierten, which had to be won. They implemented their most important direct request, when they dictated to the executive council the Soviets' famous instruction Nr.1, which ordered the choice of regiment committees and the assumption that of regiment among the Soviets. With it they were satisfied.
