The French Revolution was a period of French history that lasted from 1789 to 1799. Influenced by the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment it brought many important changes to France.
One of the Revolution's most well-known events was the storming of the Bastille prison on July 14, 1789.
The Bastille was a castle where the royal family locked up those who did not obey them, often sentencing them to death. It was destroyed by the third estate, the lowest class in France. They set the prisoners free, then they destroyed the building. Later they built a bridge from the bricks of the Bastille.
The third estate rebelled because of unfair social divisions. Around 98 percent French people were in the third estate. Only 1.5 percent were in the second estate, and 0.5 percent was in the first estate. Although they were the poorest class, the third estate paid all the taxes. The government was in debt because of spending money on luxuries and war. The king, Louis XVI, wanted to raise taxes. He called for a meeting of the Estates-General, which was an assembly made up of people from all three estates. It had not met since 1614. Louis XVI tried to make the first and second estates pay taxes, but they refused. The third estate wanted more votes in the Estates-General, since they were 98 percent of the people, but the king refused.
The third estate then called itself the "National Assembly". Representatives from the national Assembly began work on a new constitution. After this, the king banned the third estate from the Estates-General.
At first this led to the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in 1789. It was written by a young noble named Marquis de Lafayette, who fought in the American Revolution. The Declaration was the start of a constitutional change that made France a republic. The French Republic was supposedly based on the slogan of 'Liberty, Equality and Fraternity', which meant that everyone was supposed to be free, equal and across all countries be considered the same, like brothers. But the leaders soon turned it into a Reign of Terror, where up to 40,000 people were put to death, including Austrian-born Queen Marie Antoinette and King Louis XVI. The people that were killed were people that supported the king, mainly from the first and second estates. They were beheaded with guillotines during this change. The revolutionaries even tried to make a new religion and a new calendar.
The french revolution ended the monarchy in France, also known as 'l'Ancien Régime', forever. However, before long Napoleon Bonaparte declared himself Emperor of France and ended the Republic.
