The Free Democratic Party or Freie Demokratische Partei, short FDP (from 1968 to 2001 F.D.P.) is a political party in Germany. Currently its position is that of free market believer. The party does not want to take away all of the social features of the German welfare state, however.
History.
Several liberal parties have existed in Germany since the 19th century.
The FDP was founded in Western Germany in September of 1945 in the state of Hamburg. It became member of the state parliament of Hamburg in the first election.
Similar liberal parties were founded in other German states, most of them successful in getting mandates.
In 1947, on March 17th, the "Demokratische Partei Deutschlands" (DPD) was founded as a whole-German liberal party by Theodor Heuss and Wilhelm Külz, but it broke down after a short while.
On December, 11th in 1948 the FDP was founded as a liberal party for Western Germany.
Chief of the party was Theodor Heuss.
In its first years the main part of the party followed a national-liberal way. Liberal in the economical field, but very conserative in most other fields.
But in every state it had its own way.
The next important man was Thomas Dehler.
The FDP was the smaller partner of the CDU under Konrad Adenauer. It was member of the Western German government from 1949 to 1966.
In 1969 the FDP returned to government. But now the FDP was partner of the Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands under Willy Brandt, later Helmut Schmidt.
It changed its values. A lot of left-liberal position were leading ideas of the FDP in that time.
Civil rights and to give everyone the chance of a good education guaranteed state stipendia, no study fees any more, more higher education schools).
It changed again in 1982, when it crashed down the government on Schmidt and elected Helmut Kohl of the CDU to the new chancellor.
It became more and more a single issue party with its only interest in a low tax tarif - espially for high incomes.
It fought for study fees now and against social security. It secretary general said one day "We are the party of the best-incomes".
In 1998 it lost its power and became part of the opposition.
In some state parliaments thew FDP is still in power as junior partner of the CDU.
The party's inofficial motto is "So viel Staat wie nötig, so wenig Staat wie möglich!", meaning "as much state as necessary, as little state as possible!"
