Frank James Lampard, Jr. is an English football player, son of Frank Lampard Senior. He was born June 20, 1978 in Romford, London, England. He went to Brentwood School in Essex, where amongst other subjects, he studied Latin and gained an A* grade. He is an English Premier League football player currently at Chelsea, and plays for England too. He is a midfielder and wears the number 8. Currently, Lampard is Chelsea's current highest goalscorer with 115 goals. Lampard is also the goal scorer in the Premier League for a midfielder.
Career.
Frank Lampard started his football career at West Ham United F.C. Lampard joined West Ham, where his father was the assistant coach, as an apprentice in July 1994 as part of their youth system, and signed his professional forms a year later. He was loaned to Division Two team Swansea City in October 1995, and debuted in a 2-0 win over Bradford City. Lampard made nine league appearances for Swansea before returning to West Ham in January 1996, with whom he played his first match at the end of the month against Coventry City F.C., and spent the remainder of the season as a reserve.
The next year, a broken leg suffered in a March game against Aston Villa prematurely put an end to Lampard's 1996-97 season after thirteen appearances. He had to wait until the '97-98 campaign to score his first goal for West Ham, which came in a road victory over Barnsley F.C. He became a starter in 1998-99 and appeared in every match as West Ham finished fifth in the Premiership standings.
Following the sale of teammate and friend Rio Ferdinand to Leeds United after the 2000-01 season, combined with the departures of his father and Redknapp, Lampard followed suit and left West Ham, but chose to stay home in London by joining Chelsea for an £11 million fee.[2]
Chelsea.
Lampard made his debut for Chelsea on August 19 2001. He has since been a regular on the team sheet.
Personal Life.
Lampard lives in Surrey with his Spanish fiance Elen Rives and their two daughters Luna and Isla.
