"Fireproof" is a 2008 American drama movie from Sherwood Pictures. Stephen Kendrick co-wrote the movie with his brother, while serving as a producer. The supporting cast is made up of volunteers from Sherwood Baptist Church in, where the Kendrick brothers are associate pastors. The movie hasKirk Cameron as Caleb Holt in his first theater-released movie since 2001's '.
On May 21, 2008, Sherwood Pictures said that the movie would open in theaters on September 26, 2008. It was given an MPAA rating of PG for "thematic material and some peril".
Plot.
"Fireproof" is the story of a firefighter, Captain Caleb Holt, who lives by the old firefighter's adage: "Never leave your partner behind". But, after seven years of marriage to his wife Catherine, their own relationship is failing. Neither one understands the pressures the other faces. Caleb claims that Catherine is too sensitive and "doesn't show me respect." Whereas she tells her hospital co-workers that he is "so insensitive" and that "he doesn't listen to me" and "doesn't understand my needs." As they prepare to file for divorce, Caleb's father challenges his son to commit to a 40-day test called "The Love Dare." Caleb starts it, but more for his father's sake than for his marriage.
When Caleb learns the book’s daily challenges are tied into his parents' newfound faith, his already limited interest is further dampened. Even though he wants to stay true to the promise to his father, Caleb becomes frustrated time and time again. He finally asks his father, "How am I supposed to show love to somebody who constantly rejects me?" When his father tells him that this is the love God shows to people, Caleb makes a life-changing commitment to love God. And, with God's help, he begins to understand what it means to truly love his wife. But, he is unsure if it's too late to "fireproof" his marriage.
Production.
"Fireproof" was filmed for 30 days over a two-month period between late October 2007 and December 14, 2007. The production was based on a budget of $500,000, which was more than $100,000 which Sherwood Pictures' had used to make "Facing the Giants". "Fireproof" was shot in sixteen locations, all of which were donated. Craig von Buseck of the Christian Broadcasting Network said that the movie was "beautifully shot in and around Albany, Georgia, home to Sherwood Church." The Albany Fire Department donated their fire station locations, trucks and even some of their crew for use during the filming. Stephen Kendrick said, "We’ve never claimed that our movies are Academy Award winning. [...] But we are trying to pursue excellence."
Marriage views.
"Fireproof" is partnered with "Fireproof My Marriage", an organization created to strengthen and heal marriages. "The Love Dare", a book written by Alex and
Stephen Kendrick, is a major topic in the movie, being one of the main points of the plot. Alex Kendrick said in an interview that this movie would be "a drama/romance about marriage. Our goal is to reinforce God's intention for marriage."
With 50% of all marriages in the United States ending in divorce, "Fireproof" has been endorsed by many marriage-oriented organizations, some of them are FamilyLife, "The Marriage CoMission", "The Association of Marriage and Family Ministries", "Marriage Alive Communications" and "MarriageToday". The movie has been uniting many other marriage advocates from all over the United States.
Christian groups.
"Fireproof" has been given very good reviews from Christian groups since it was first seen. Mitch Temple of Focus on the Family said that, "This brilliantly produced film radiates messages of authentic determination, faith and hope, even for those of us who have felt like giving up on our marriages." Michael Foust of the Baptist Press said that, "I walked into the theater without any expectations, but walked out after the closing credits believing I had just seen perhaps the most convicting and inspiring film I had ever viewed. Fireproof isn't just a great Christian movie. It's a great movie. Period."
While watching the movie for the second time, Steven Isaac of Plugged In said, "I was with my bride of 14 years. [...] All I wanted to do was hold her hand."
Movies critics.
This movie has also been given mixed reviews from movie critics. Chris Willman of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the film a "C," and said that, "the conversion subplot feels shoehorned into the more crucial marital doings, as if coming to Jesus might be just one of a long checklist of steps to restore sizzle to your marriage, right between buying roses and preparing a candlelit dinner."
Frank Scheck of "The Hollywood Reporter" said, "While hardly sophisticated in its approach and certainly not polished in its technical elements, the film does get its heartfelt message across with undeniable sincerity. Its success at the boxoffice, which will no doubt continue on home video, demonstrates that there's no shortage of filmgoers dissatisfied with cynical Hollywood product." Joe Leydon of "Variety" gave the film a positive review saying "Cameron is genuinely compelling as Caleb, a work-obsessed firefighter on the verge of divorce from his neglected wife."
Box office.
"Fireproofs advance sales was 40% of all Fandango sales from Friday morning. In the week before opening, "Fireproof" had pre-sold more than $1 million in tickets, far above the blockbusters of the weekend. "Fireproof" was released on September 26, 2008 in 839 theaters. In its first weekend, "Fireproof" grossed over $6.8 million, putting it in fourth place at the box office. As of October 15, 2008, "Fireproof" has stayed in the top 10 films in America. As of October 26, 2008, "Fireproof" has an earned about $30,492,054, tripling the lifetime earnings of the movie made before it, "Facing the Giants", and moving it into the top 5 Christian films by earnings.
In each of "Fireproofs first four weeks in the box office, it added theaters. It had 839 theaters in its first weekend, 852 in its second, 875 in its third, and 905 in its fourth. During this time, it did lose some theaters, bringing its total down to 787, but it was quickly brought back in its sixth week, adding over 100 theaters to the count. In its seventh week, beginning on November 7th, it opened in over 130 more new theaters.
