Fascism is a kind of right-wing government. In fascism, the country is considered more important than any one person. A country under this kind of government is usually run by a person called a dictator, who has the right of total control over the government and people. Even though most fascists would agree in theory that the country is the most important thing, fascists in real life act like the things that the dictator wants are more important than anything else in the country or even human life.
Fascism appeared in Europe before World War II because many people were afraid of communism and they thought that democracy was too weak to defend them. Fascism was supposed to be the answer for that need.
Fascist governments are different from communist ones in that fascists do not want to take over land and factories to own them, but rather merely want to control them closely. Instead, they usually work closely with people who already manage these things but use the resources to build up the army or other parts of the fascist state. Also the state takes over (confiscates) any financial profits the land and factories produce. It is very important to fascists that all schools in the country teach children that the dictator is the most important person in the world. All adults are expected to either join the fascist party or support it as the government.
It is always a big crime in fascist countries to speak against the leader or ruling party. Fascist leaders almost always give themselves a high military rank (even if they have not earned it), or appear in public in an army or navy uniform, because fascist countries consider the army the most important part of the government.
The first fascist government was run by Benito Mussolini in Italy from 1922 until 1943. The governments of Engelbert Dollfuss in Austria and Adolf Hitler in Germany are also referred to as fascist, but this is not completely accurate.
Other examples are Imperial Japan under Hideki Tojo, Greece under Joannis Metaxas, Spain under the rule of Francisco Franco, and Portugal when António de Oliveira Salazar was the head of the goverrnment. All of these governments were much like Italian fascism.
Fascism is named after the fasces, which is an old Roman Empire name for a group of sticks tied together. It is easy to break one stick in half. It is very hard to break many sticks tied together in half. Fascists think that everyone following the same leader makes the country strong the same way the sticks are. In real life, fascist governments did not last for a long time, either because people got tired of being oppressed and had a revolution or the fascist party provoked a war with other countries that they then lost. Both things happened at the same time in Italy in 1943.
In countries led by fascist governments, the government tried to control all areas of life, including work, school, and family life. Fascist ideas were most common around the time of World War II. Many people were killed by fascist governments because the government did not like them or because they opposed fascism. Even more were killed in wars started by fascist governments. But the fascist governments of Portugal and Spain did not take part in World War II, and stayed in power until the 1970s.
