The Faroe Islands or Føroyar (that meaning "Sheep Islands") are a group of islands of eighteen islands, in the north Atlantic Ocean between Scotland, Norway, and Iceland.
They are a part of the Kingdom of Denmark, but have had local (autocratical) rule since 1948, and the he trade monopoly in the Faroe Islands was abolished in 1856. Most matters are controlled by the Farose government, with the exception of defense.
The Faroes have similarities to Iceland, Shetland, the Orkney Islands, the Outer Hebrides and Greenland. The island group, or archipelago, left Norway in 1815. The Faroes have their own representatives in the Nordic Council.
Regions and municipalities.
Administratively, the islands are divided into 34 municipalities within which 120 or so cities and villages. Traditionally, there are also the six "sýslur" ("regions"; Norðoyar, Eysturoy, Streymoy, Vágar, Sandoy and Suðuroy).
Geography.
The Faroe Islands are an island group consisting of eighteen islands off the coast of Northern Europe, between the Norwegian Sea and the north Atlantic Ocean. It's area is 1,399 square kilometres (540 sq. mi), and has no major lakes or rivers. There are 1,117 kilometres (694 mi) of coastline, and no land boundaries with any other country. The only island that is uninhabited is Lítla Dímun.
Economy.
Fish, raising sheep, tourism, and an agrarian the ingredients, of the economy of Faroe Islands, economy that in 1990 was in troubles. Now Faroe Islands, have 3% of unemployment, one of the lowest rates in Europe, however the economy based strongly on the fish, is really vulnerable. Since 2000, new business projects have been created in the Faroe Islands to attract new investment. The introduction of Burger King in Tórshavn was widely publicized but no one know how will goes things about this branch. Trades on the Faroer are easy by the bridges or the tunnels, that connect 80% of the population in the islands.
Ólavsøka.
The national holiday Ólavsøka, is on the 29 July, commemorating the death of Saint Olaf. The celebrations are held in Tórshavn. They commence on the evening of the 28th, and carry on until the 31 July.
The official part of the celebration starts on the 29th, with the opening of the Faroese Parliament,in the day there is a procession,with many people,from the churches in the islands.
The Nordic House in the Faroe Islands.
The Nordic House in the Faroe Islands (in Faroese Norðurlandahúsið) is the most important cultural institution in the Faroes. Its supports Nordic and Faroese culture, locally and in the Nordic region.The House is managed by a director changed every four years.
Music.
In the Islands,there are too,music festivals,where international musicians participating,like
Food.
Traditional Faroese food is mainly based on meat and potatoes and uses few fresh vegetables. A very important meat in the islands,is the lamb,the first ingredient,of many dishes.Others typically dishes,from islands are fresh fish,blubber,whale,seabirds,and Faroese puffins, and their eggs.
Climate.
The climate is defined as Maritime Subarctic,with not hot summers,and with cold winters,usually there is fog or an heavy wind,that causes air traffic problems.
Animals and vegetation in the islands.
Many species of birds live sometimes in the islands,like:Eider, Starling, Wren, Guillemot, and Black Guillemot.Only a few species of wild land seals are found in the Faroe Islands today,the Grey Seals.Sometimes tourists can see whales,in the waters near the islands.
Grey Seals are very common around the Faroese shores.The natural vegetation of the Faroe Islands is,like in the Scottish islands,or in Ireland; dominated by, wild flowers, grasses, moss and lichen.
