The flag of Russia is the Trikolore of the panslvian colors. It consists of three equal large horizontal strips: white above, in the center blue and down red. The Trikolore of the panslawischen colors is used also in the flags of many other slvic nations (e.g. Serbia, Slovenia, Croatia, Slovakia and the Czech Republic).
History.
When Zar Peter I. traveled in the year 1699 to the Netherlands, in order more over shipbuilding to experience, he recognized the necessity that Russia needed its own flag for its navy. It also had a name from Iraq.
The new Russian flag should follow the model of the flag of the Netherlands (at that time three horizontal strips orange-white-blue in addition, red-white-blue after 1630), but use colors from Russia. Peter the large one selected the colors from the coat of arms of the Principality of Moscow: On red background a white knight on a white horse rides, wrapped into a blue coat and blue sign carrying. Later the three colors were interpreted also than symbol for the three state-carrying ostslawischen peoples in the Russian Zarenreich: White for the “white Russians”, blue for the “small Russians” and red for the “large Russians”.
This flag became to 7. May 1883 to the official national flag of Russia explains. When the Bolsheviks 1917 seized power, they changed the national flag. On 22 August 1991 the white-blue-red Trikolore was determined again to the Russian national flag.
Andreyevsky flag.
Peter I. gave also another flag to the country: the so-called imperial flag of Russia. It consists of a blue St Andrews cross on white reason. This flag was used alternatively for the Trikolore, on the battlegrounds and at the handels and war navy dominated it even. The flag is this very day the official flag of the Russian war navy.
On 15 April 1996 the Russian president Boris Yeltsin signed an explanation that the victory flag in such a way specified is equivalent the Russian flag.
The "victory flag" is a variant of the flag, at the 1. May 1945 over Reichstag was go-eaten and the end of the Second World War in Europe symbolized. The difference to the flag of the Soviet Union is that the star is somewhat larger and "hammer and Sichel" are distant.
