Geology is the study of the nonliving things that the Earth is made of. Geology is the study of soil and rocks. The people that study Geology are called "Geologists". By studying the soil and rocks that the Earth's surface is made of, Geologists can learn more about the history of the Earth. Some of the important "events" (things that happen) in the Earth's history are floods, volcanic eruptions, and earthquakes. Some Geologists study soil and rocks to find metals and fuels that are underground.
Geology is divided into smaller subjects that just study one part of Geology.
Types of rock.
Rocks can be found in all sorts of shapes and colours. Some are very hard and some are soft. Some rocks are very common, while others are rare. However, all the different rocks belong to three categories or types, Igneous, Sedimentary and Metamorphic.
Igneous rock.
Igneous rock is rock that has been made under the ground by volcanic action. Igneous rock is made when the hot molten (melted) "magma" or "lava" which is under the surface of the earth cools down and sets hard. This often happens after a volcano has erupted, and lots of hot magma has spilled down the sides of the volcano. Sometimes the runs in streams, and sometimes its spreads out across the land. Sometimes the magma doesn't come out through a volcano, but spreads underground between layers of rock. A well-known igneous rock is pumice.
Sedimentary rock.
Sedimentary rock is rock that has been made from "sediment". "Sediment" is all the pieces, large and small, that get left behind by water. Sediment can be made from sand, gravel and the bodies and shells of animals. The sediment gets dropped in a layer at the bottom of a river or sea. As the sediment piles up, the lowers layers get squashed together. Slowly they set hard into rock. Some sedimentary rocks are made of just one type of sediment, all about the same size, such as sand. Other sedimentary rocks will have large and small lumps, and pieces made of different types of rock. Well-known sedimentary rocks are sandstone and limestone.
Metamorphic rock.
Metamorphic rock is rock that has been changed. The word "metamorphosis" means "change". Sometimes an igneous, or a sedimentary rock can be heated, or squashed under the ground, so that it changes. Metamorphic rock is often harder than the rock that it was before it changed. One well-kknown metamorphic rock is marble which is valued for its different colours, and because it can be carved and polished. Slate is a metamorphic rock that is a useful building material.
Faults.
All three kinds of rock can be changed by being bent by forces in the earth. When this happens, faults (cracks) appear in the rock. Geologists can learn a lot about the history of the rock by studying the patterns of the fault lines.
Soil.
Soil is the stuff on the ground made of lots of "particles" (or tiny pieces). The particles of soil come from rocks that have broken down, and from rotting leaves and animals bodies. Soil covers a lot of the surface of the Earth. Plants of all sorts grow in soil.
To find out more about types of rocks, go to Rock (geology).
To find out more about soil, go to Soil.
Principles of Geology.
Geologists use some simple ideas which help them to understand the rocks and soil that they are studying. These ideas are called the "Principles of Geology".
