The Grand Duchy of Lithuania (, old literary Lithuanian: "Didi Kunigiste Letuvos", Ruthenian: "Wialikaje Kniastwa Litowskaje, Ruskaje, Żamojckaje",,, Russian: "Великое Княжество Литовское", German: "Großfürstentum Litauen") was an Eastern and Central European state from the 12th /13th century until the 18th century. It was founded by Lithuanians, one of the pagan Baltic tribes, whose initial lands covered the eastern part of present day Lithuania, Aukštaitija. It later expanded its territory to include large parts of former Kievan Rus. The Grand Duchy of Lithuania covered the territory of present-day Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Transnistria and parts of Poland and Russia. At its greatest size, in the 15th century, it was the largest state in Europe.
Consolidation of Lithuanian lands started in the 12th century, as marked by extensive raids by Lithuanians of wealthy cities such as Novgorod and Pskov. The 13th century saw the beginning of the wars with the Teutonic Knights and the Livonian Order. It witnessed the rise of Mindaugas, who was crowned as King of Lithuania in 1253. The title of "Grand Duchy" was consistently applied to Lithuania from the 14th century onward. The multi-ethnic and multi-confessional state emerged only at the late reign of Gediminas. During the reign of his son Algirdas, the grand Duchy expanded more than under any other ruler.
Algirdas's successor Jogaila opened a new chapter in the history of Lithuania by signing the Krėva agreement in 1386. This treaty paved the way for coronation of Jogaila as a King of Poland, acceptance of Roman Catholic Christianity by Lithuania, and establishing a dynastic union between the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland, to the Catholic faith.
Soon afterwards, Vytautas the Great acquired supreme power in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Vytautas led the army of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania into the Battle of Grunwald in 1410, which signified the downfall of the Teutonic Order. After Vytautas's death, Lithuania's relationship with the Kingdom of Poland greatly deteriorated. Lithuanian noblemen tried to break the personal union with the Kingdom of Poland. Unsuccessful wars with the Grand Duchy of Moscow forced the union to remain intact, despite the opposition from some noblemen like the Radvilos.
Eventually, the Union of Lublin in 1569 created the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. In this federation, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania had a separate government, laws, army, and treasury. During Commonwealth times, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was involved in many wars, like the Livonian War, the Northern War and others. The Union with Poland failed to prevent territorial losses to the ascending Russians. In 1795, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth was destroyed and partitioned between Imperial Russia, Prussia and Austria.
