Girolamo Savonarola (September 21, 1452 – May 23, 1498),was an Italian Dominican priest and leader of Florence from 1494 until his execution in 1498. Savonarola is famous for burning books,and for the destruction of what he considered immoral art. Savonarola was the first and the only leader that controlled Florence without violence. Savonarola was a priest but he preached against the moral corruption of the clergy and the Church of Rome. His main enemy was Pope Alexander VI. He is sometimes seen as a precursor of Martin Luther and the Protestant Reformation,however he remained a devout Roman Catholic.
In the twentieth century, a movement for the canonization of "Frà Savonarola" began to develop within the Roman Catholic Church, particularly among Dominicans, with many judging his excommunication and execution to have been unjust. His potential beatification and canonization is opposed by many Jesuits, who consider Savonarola's (secular) conflict with the papacy to have been an intolerable crime.
Early years.
Savonarola was born in Ferrara, the capital of an independent Duchy.
In his youth he began studied the Bible. After the youth Savonarola studied at the University of Ferrara. His hate against morally corrupt clergy was initially manifested in two poems,the firstpoem on the destruction of the world entitled "De Ruina Mundi" ("On the Downfall of the World"), written at the age of 20,and the second poem "De Ruina Ecclesiae" ("On the Downfall of the Church") in 1475,where he spoke about Roman Curia as 'a false, proud whore'.
Florence.
Savonarola became a Dominican friar in 1475, during the Italian Renaissance, and entered the convent of San Domenico in Bologna. He studied intensly theologic studies, and in 1479 transferred to the convent of Santa Maria degli Angeli. Finally in 1482 the Order took him to Florence, the ‘city of his destiny’. After five years,he returned to Bologna where he became 'master of studies’.
Savonarola returned to Florence in 1490 where he began to preach passionately about the Last Days, with visions and prophetic announcements of direct communications with God and the saints. Savonarola,helped by disaster gave a big credibily,the message were about the losing power of the Medici's family.
Savonarola never tried to make war on the Church of Rome, he just wanted to correct the transgressions of worldly popes.
After Charles VIII of France invaded Florence in 1494, the ruling Medici were overthrown and Savonarola emerged as the new leader of the city, combining in himself the role of secular leader and priest. He set up a rather modern democratic republic in Florence,Savonarola make Florence a city devoted to God,as a good “Christian and religious Republic,” one of its first acts was to make sodomy, previously punishable by fine, into a capital offence. In the city after him homosexuality was previously tolerated in the city, and many homosexuals were important people in Florence.
In 1497, he and his followers went in Piazza della Signoria,and began to burn: mirrors, cosmetics, lewd pictures, pagan books, gaming tables, and musical instruments, fine dresses, women’s hats, and the works of immoral and ancient poets, and burnt them all in a large piles.Savonarola burn paintings same by famous artists as Sandro Botticelli and Michelangelo Buonarroti.
The Fall.
Florence soon became tired of Savonarola because of the city was continuely in misery, where God did not seem to intervene, and the Last Days announced from Savonarola,weren't never came.
During his Ascension Day sermon on May 4, 1497, bands of youths rioted, and the riot became a revolt: dancing and singing and taverns reopened.
Excommunication and execution.
On May 13, 1497, the r "Father" Savonarola was excommunicated by Pope Alexander VI, and in 1498, Alexander demanded his arrest and execution. On April 8, a troop of soldiers attacked the Convent of San Marco; and in a bloodybath, where Savonarola’s guards and religious supporters were killed, he surrendered. Savonarola during the next few weeks was tortured for to take a confession, Pope put on him, crimes of heresy, corruption and others crimes against the Church.
On the day of his execution he was taken out to the Piazza della Signoria with Fra Silvestro and Fra Domenico da Pescia, two religiouses two friends of Savonarola. the three were ritually stripped of their clerical vestments, degraded as "heretics and schismatics".The three were put on three crosses,and burned alive.Savonarola died in the same place where the "Bonfire of the Vanities" destroyed by his hands what he considerated immoral art.
Niccolò Machiavelli, author of "The Prince", also witnessed and wrote about the execution. The Medici after regained control of Florence.
