Ganesha or (Ganesh) is the elephant-headed god in Hinduism. He is the son of Shiva and Parvati.
Ganesha is a very popular god of Hindus. Hindu tradition states that Ganesha is a god of wisdom, success and good luck. He is also giver of different types of favors. The Hindu tradition calls Ganesha as the Vighneshvara. "Vighneshvara" in Sanskrit language means one who is the lord of obstacles or difficulties. Thus, the Hindu tradition states that by worshiping Ganesha, one can remove all obstacle and difficulties.
His worship.
There are not many temples (mandirs) of Ganesha. But, in most of the temples of Hindus, people worship Ganesha along with other gods and goddesses. Hindu Tradition gives Ganesha an important place. The tradition says that Hindus should worship Ganesha first in all their religious functions and ceremonies. Generally, many Hindus also worship Ganesha before starting any new thing. Thus, for example, before occupying a new house, they may worship Ganesha. Likewise, before starting any new business, many Hindus may worship Ganesha.
Mythology.
There are many mythological stories about Ganesha.
A story says that Parvati had made a boy of sand. The boy of sand became alive. This boy was guarding the way while Parvati was taking a bath. Shiva wanted to meet his wife, Parvati. The boy did not allow him. Shiva became angry. He cut the head of the boy. Then, the head of an elephant was fixed to make the boy alive again. Therefore, Ganesha has a head of an elephant.
There is one other story. Parvati was very proud of her son Ganesha. She asked Shani (planet Saturn, god of bad luck) to look at her son. Shani looked at the face of Ganesha. Shani’s look burnt Ganesha’s face and he became headless. Then Brahma (the creator god of Hindus) advised Parvati to fix the first head of anything she could find. Parvati found a head of an elephant. This head she fixed on the body of Ganesha. Thus, Ganesha got an elephant’s head.
Ganesha was having a race with his brother Kartikeya, the first one to go around the world would be the winner.So Kartikeya raced off the next day but Ganesha stayed and thought about how he could win. Eventually he sat on his mount a rat and went round his parents(who represent the whole world in Hindu scriptures) seven times. Thus, Ganesha was declared the winner due to his intelligence.
Reference.
Dictionary of Hindu Lore and Legend (ISBN 0500510881) by Anna Dallapiccola
