"For the automobile, see Ford Galaxy."
A galaxy is a group of many stars including gas, dust, and dark matter. Gravity holds galaxies together. Everything in a galaxy moves around a centre. The name galaxy is taken from the Greek word "Galaxia" meaning milky, a reference to the our own galaxy, the Milky Way.
There are three main types of galaxies: ellipticals, spirals, and irregulars. All Galaxies exist inside the universe. There are an estimated one hundred billion galaxies within distance we can see or the Observable Universe. Each galaxy contains roughly one hundred thousand to one trillion stars. This makes the number of stars in the Universe more than every grain of sand on every beach on Earth.
We can describe galaxies by the number of stars they have. The galaxy we call the Small Magellanic Cloud has about one billion stars in it. This is a small galaxy in comparison to most, but it isn't the smallest: Leo I and Leo II have about 1 million stars in them, and the Draco System has "only" a few hundred thousand stars. Astronomers call these galaxies "dwarf galaxies."
In general, smaller groups are called "star clusters," not galaxies (a "cluster" is a group of something, like a cluster of grapes.) The largest star cluster, a globular cluster called Messier 15 has about 6 million stars, so we see that for small galaxies, there is a blurring together of what we mean by a galaxy and a large star cluster.
In addition to their mass and numbers of stars, a galaxy is a collection of stars and gas which move through the universe independently of the Milky Way. Globular clusters are roundish swarms of stars that orbit the Milky Way, while the Leo and Draco Systems seem to be independent collections of stars.
Many galaxies also continue to form new generations of stars. The Milky Way, and all spiral shaped galaxies like it (see above image of NGC 2997), produce new stars at a rate of one or two stars per year. These stars are formed in the vast interstellar clouds that account for about 1 to 10 percent of the mass of these galaxies. Globular star clusters, on the other hand, are not currently forming stars because this activity happened billions of years ago and then stopped once all of the gas and dust clouds were used up.
It is hard to say if the galaxies we see are all that there really are. It is even hard to say if "are" means anything if we can never see or measure them. Models of our universe are sometimes finite, and sometimes infinite - if they are infinite we can never see all the galaxies. Often galaxies are also known as island universes.
