Global warming is a term regarding the slow increase of the earth's temperature. Global warming may become a problem for the world and has already been linked to floods and other types of storms.
Today, the atmosphere of the world is about a half a degree Celsius warmer than it was two hundred years ago. Many people want to know why the earth's climate is changing. Most say that the changes are caused by people themselves (by cars and factories, for example). Some say the change is natural and not the fault of humans.
The average temperature at the surface of the Earth has gone up by 0.6 Celsius since the late 19th century. There are several theories (ways) which try to explain this increase. Some scientists think that the warming of the last 50 years is believed to be a result of increases in the greenhouse effect caused by human-generated carbon dioxide (CO2). Others think that variations in the amount of heat from the sun and other natural causes.
A "theory" in science is not just an idea in the mind. It's something which has been tested and well-confirmed. Unfortunately, climate theories are difficult to test and often rely on computer models which are not always accurate. Today, many scientists agree that the "theory" that global warming is caused by human activity is true. Still, because scientific answers are found through experiment and not votes the search for the cause of global warming must go on.
Climate models show that temperatures will probably increase by 1.4°C - 5.8°C between 1990 and 2100. Much of the uncertainty in this increase results from not knowing future CO2 emissions, but there is also uncertainty about the accuracy of climate models. Climate commitment studies predict that even if levels of greenhouse gases and solar activity were to remain constant, the global temperature will increase by 0.5°C over the next one hundred years due to the lag in warming caused by the oceans.
Although the discussion of global warming often focuses on temperature, global warming or any climate change may cause changes in other things as well, including the sea level, precipitation, weather patterns, etc. These may affect human activity via floods, droughts, heat waves, changes to farm productivity, etc.
About global warming.
Over the past 100 or so years, the global (world) temperature has increased by about 0.6 ± 0.2°C. Over the past 1-2 thousand years the temperature has been pretty stable, with various (possibly local) changes, such as the Medieval Warm Period or the Little Ice Age.
Al Gore is one of the people who tried to stop global warming, and started to make people think about changing their lifestyles
Greenhouse gases.
Coal-burning power plants, car exhausts, factory smokestacks, and other waste vents of the human environment give off about 23 billion tons of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the Earth's atmosphere each year. The atmospheric concentration of CO2 has increased by 31% above pre-industrial levels since 1750. This is quite higher than at any time during the last 420,000 years, the period for which reliable data has been extracted from ice cores. From less direct geological evidence, it is believed that CO2 values this high were last attained 40 million years ago. About three-quarters of the antropogenic emissions of CO2 to the atmosphere during the past 20 years are due to fossil fuel burning. The rest is predominantly due to land-use change, especially deforestation.
There could be other factors.
There may be other causes of global warming. A few scientists believe that atmospheric carbon dioxide is actually determined by global temperatures, and that increased solar (sun) activity has caused the temperature rise.
Future.
So, if the theory is correct, then it is possible to predict future climate, based on assumptions of future emissions. Climate models project a warming of 1.4°C to 5.8°C between 1990 and 2100.
Effects.
The effects of global warming are very foremost. The United Nations' Environmental Program recently announced that severe weather around the world has made 2005 the most costly year on record.
It would cost a lot of money to cut off global warming in its tracks. If we spend a little money now to help solve the problem of global warming now, then we can save ourselves from losing a lot of money later in life when the erroneous effects of global warming occur. The sea level will rise, which means that coasts will move inland and cause floods. There will be more rain, which will cause floods. Storms will be stronger, which will cause damage. There will be more diseases such as malaria and dengue fever, and it is possible that more people will die in disasters. It is also possible that winters will be colder in some climates. And, obviously, droughts will last longer and will be hotter in some areas.
If we spend 1% of our resources on this problem now, we may save as much as 20% of our resources soon. Some scientists believe that if we don't take effort in reducing global warming in the next decade or two, we will lose our chance. We should try to solve the problem of global warming.
