Green Day is an American rock band trio that formed in 1987. The members of the band are Billie Joe Armstrong (vocals, guitar), Mike Dirnt (bass guitar, vocals), and Tré Cool (drums, percussion).
Green Day was first part of the punk rock scene at 924 Gilman Street in Berkeley, California. Its record label debut "Dookie" (1994) became a success and soon sold more than ten million copies in the United States alone, and 15 million copies worldwide. The album was well reviewed and the band were praised for it's music and sales. Green day had three more albums after that, "Insomniac", "Nimrod" and "Warning". They were still successful albums, reaching double platinum, double platinum, and gold status respectively. However none of them sold as many as their first album, Dookie. Green Day's 2004 rock opera "American Idiot" sold five million copies in the United States.
Green Day has sold over 65 million records worldwide, including 22 million in the United States alone. They also have won three Grammy Awards, Best Alternative Album for "Dookie", Best Rock Album for "American Idiot", and Record of the Year for "Boulevard of Broken Dreams".
Formation and Lookout years (1987–93).
In 1987, 14 year old friends Billie Joe Armstrong and Mike Dirnt made a band called Sweet Children. The first Sweet Children show was on October 17, 1987, at Rod's Hickory Pit in Vallejo, California where Armstrong's mother was working. In 1988, Armstrong and Dirnt began working with John Kiffmeyer (also known as Al Sobrante). He used to be drummer for the band Isocracy. Kiffmeyer was also the band's business manager; he decided what time the band played shows and worked to get the band more fans.
The owner of Lookout! Records, Larry Livermore, saw the band play an early show and signed them to his label. The band recorded their first EP, "1,000 Hours", in 1989. After "1,000 Hours" was released, the band changed their band name, Sweet Children, to Green Day, because others may be confused with another band Sweet Baby, who had a similar name. The band started to use the name Green Day, because they liked marijuana.
In the in early 1990s, Lookout! released Green Day's first LP, "Smooth". Green Day recorded two EPs later that year: "Slappy" and "Sweet Children," Lookout! Records released "Smoothed Out Slappy Hours," an album that had "39/Smooth," "Slappy," and "1,000 Hours" EPs in it. In late 1990, shortly after the band's first worldwide tour, Sobrante left the band to go to college. The Lookouts drummer Tré Cool than became a temporary replacement, and later became a permanent replacement because Sobrante did not want to come back to the band. Green Day was on tour for most of 1992 and 1993, and played a lot of shows overseas in Europe. Its second album "Kerplunk" sold about 50,000 copies in the U.S., which was a large amount for the punk band in 1992.
Breakthrough success (1994–96).
"Kerplunk's" success made major record labels interested in Green Day, and they soon left Lookout! and signed with Reprise Records after getting the attention of producer Rob Cavallo. Signing to Reprise made many punk rock fans think Green Day as sellouts. After signing with Reprise, the band went to work on making its major label debut, "Dookie."
Released in February of 1994, and recorded in 3 weeks, "Dookie" became a commercial success, making it to MTV for the videos of the songs "Longview", "Basket Case", and "When I Come Around", all of which made it to the number one position on the Modern Rock Tracks charts.
"Insomniac" was a better release for the band than the poppier "Dookie." "Insomniac" earned 4 out of 5 stars from "Rolling Stone Magazine", which said "In punk, the good stuff actually unfolds and gains meaning as you listen without sacrificing any of its electric, haywire immediacy. And Green Day are as good as this stuff gets." "Insomniac" won the band award nominations for Favorite Artist, Favorite Hard Rock Artist, and Favorite Alternative Artist at the 1996 American Music Awards. The video for "Walking Contradiction" got the band a Grammy nomination for Best Video, Short Form, and a Best Special Effects nomination at the MTV Video Music Awards.
In 1995, a new single for the "Angus" soundtrack was released, titled "J.A.R.". The single went straight to number one on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart. After that, "Insomniac," Green Day's new album, was released in the fall of 1995. After that, the band stopped from going on a European tour so they could rest for a while.
"Nimrod" and "Warning" (1997–2002).
After taking a break in 1996, Green Day began to work on a new album in 1997. Both the band and Cavallo agreed that the album had to be different from its last records. They came up with "Nimrod." The new album was released in October 1997. It had many types of music, from pop-punk, surf rock, and ska, to an acoustic ballade. "Nimrod" went to the charts at number 10. The success of "Good Riddance (Time of Your Life)" won the band an MTV Video Award for Best Alternative Video. The other singles released from "Nimrod" were "Nice Guys Finish Last", "Hitchin' a Ride" and "Redundant".
In 2000, Green Day released "Warning," an album that had types of songs that "Nimrod" did. Though the "Warning" made the hit "Minority" and a smaller hit with "Warning", some observers thought that the band was losing popularity. "Warning" was certified gold by the RIAA.
At the 2001 California Music Awards, Green Day won all eight awards that they were nominated for. They won the awards for Outstanding Album ("Warning"), Outstanding Punk Rock/Ska Album ("Warning"), Outstanding Group, Outstanding Male Vocalist, Outstanding Bassist, Outstanding Drummer, Outstanding Songwriter and Outstanding Artist.
"American Idiot" and renewed popularity (2003–present).
In the summer of 2003, the band went into a studio to write and record new songs for a new album titled "Cigarettes and Valentines." After making 20 tracks, the master tapes were stolen from the studio. The band was upset and chose not to try to re-create the stolen album, but instead start over with a vow to be even better than before. In this same year, Green Day went with Iggy Pop on two tracks for his album "Skull Ring." They took "band therapy," talking for a long time to work out the members' differences after accusations from Dirnt and Cool that Armstrong was "the band's Nazi" and a show-off bent on taking the limelight from the other band members.
The 2004 album, "American Idiot", was number one on the Billboard charts, the band's first ever album to top the chart, even with success of the album's first single, "American Idiot." The album was billed as a "punk rock opera" which follows the journey of the "Jesus of Suburbia". "American Idiot" won the 2005 Grammy for "Best Rock Album" and the band won a total of seven of the eight awards they were nominated for, in the 2005 MTV music awards, also with the popular Viewer's Choice Award.
Through 2005, the band toured for about 150 days — the longest tour in its career — visiting Japan, Australia, South America and the UK, where they had a crowd of 130,000 people in only two days. While touring for "American Idiot," they filmed and recorded the two concerts at the Milton Keynes National Bowl in England, which was voted 'The Best Show On Earth' in a "Kerrang!" Magazine Poll.
These recordings were released as a live CD and DVD called "Bullet in a Bible" on November 15, 2005. The DVD had a behind-the-scenes footage of the band, and showed how the band prepared to put on the show. The final shows of its 2005 world tour were in Sydney, Australia, and Melbourne, Australia, on December 14 and 17. On January 10, 2006 the band was awarded with a People's Choice Award for favorite group.
In 2006, Green Day won the Grammy Award for Record of the Year for "Boulevard of Broken Dreams" which spent 16 weeks at the number one position of Billboard's "Modern Rock Tracks", a record it shared with Red Hot Chili Peppers' "Scar Tissue" and Staind's "It's Been Awhile".
In an interview with "Kerrang!", Billie Joe said that 2008 would "be a fair estimate of the release date of their new "Untitled Eighth Studio Album"." In October 2007, Billie Joe said more on this new album, saying he had been writing new songs on the piano, and had around 45 of them. He said he wanted the new music to dig into what he's feeling during that time - which is middle-aged.
Music style and influences.
Green Day's sound is usually compared to bands such as the Ramones, The Clash, Sex Pistols, The Jam, and the Buzzcocks. Most of their songs are fast-paced and under the average song length of four minutes (4:00), though some of their songs run on longer such as "Jesus of Suburbia" which runs for nine minutes. Billie Joe Armstrong said that some of his biggest influences are alternative rock bands Hüsker Dü and The Replacements. Armstrong's lyrics mostly describe alienation, hysteria, girls, growing up, and what happens to someone if they take drugs. The Ramones had lyrical themes that were also close to Green Day's lyrics such as hysteria, alienation, girls, and drugs. Green Day has covered Ramones songs a few times, such as recording "Outsider" for the tribute album "We're a Happy Family", and performing "Blitzkrieg Bop" and "Teenage Lobotomy" when the Ramones made it into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2002.
