"Good Girl Gone Bad" is the third studio album by Rihanna. The album has 2 versions. One version called "Good Girl Gone Bad:Reloaded" was released June 2008. It features newer singles including "Take a Bow", "Disturbia", and "If I Never See Your Face Again" which is a remix single from rock-pop band "Maroon 5". The singles from the album include (from the original version of the album) "Umbrella", "Breakin' Dishes", "Shut Up and Drive", "Don't Stop the Music", and "Hate That I Love You".
The Good Girl Gone Bad Tour.
Rihanna did a worldwide concert tour on September 15, three months after the release of the album. The tour had three parts with sixty-one shows. It ended on April 5, 2008. The first part of the tour began in Canada. It included eleven shows across the country with Akon. The tour later went through United States and Europe without Akon.
Supporting acts for the tour were Akon, Ciara and David Jordan.
"Good Girl Gone Bad: Reloaded".
The album was released a second time as a two disc special version named "Good Girl Gone Bad: Reloaded" in June 2008. The set includes twelve original tracks, three new tracks—the lead U.S. number-one single "Take a Bow", a remix of "If I Never See Your Face Again" with Maroon 5, and the U.S. number-one single "Disturbia"—and a DVD containing behind the scenes footage and four live performances from her tours. It came with new album art, which features a green toned background instead of the original's grey toned background. In the UK, the background is a white-gray toned background instead of the green. The new version of the album was released in most countries on June 17, but the CD version was released on June 2 in the UK (with the DVD version following on June 16) and on June 21 in Australia. "Disturbia" was released online in May 2008. The song "Cry" was released on international versions of the album and is a UK and Australian bonus track on the re-release. The re-release made the album soar from 124 to 7 on the Billboard 200, selling 63,000 copies and having a 930% sales increases. iTunes has now removed the standard version of "Good Girl Gone Bad" and replaced it with the new reloaded version. In France the album soared from 141 to forty-three having the greatest gainer of the week. In the UK it soared from number fifty-nine to number twelve having the "Greatest Gainer" certification, before rising to number five later on in its chart run. By September 14 2008 the album has still been charting strongly in the UK, dipping in and out of the top 10 for many weeks. Good Girl Gone Bad: Reloaded reached a new peak of #3 on the UK Albums Chart.
