The Game Boys are a group of handheld video game consoles made by Nintendo.
Game Boy.
The first Game Boy was released in 1989. It had a small screen, a D-pad, and an A and B button. To play games, there were small objects called cartridges that you put into the Game Boy to play the game in the cartridge. The game that made it popular was Tetris. The Game Boy had a link cable and a link port which let it connect with other Game Boys.
Game Boy Pocket.
After the Game Boy, Nintendo released the Game Boy Pocket. It only needed two batteries instead of four. The link port was smaller than the Game Boy's, so the Game Boy and Game Boy Pocket could not connect.
Game Boy Light.
The Game Boy Light was only in Japan and had a backlight so people could see better. It is very rare. Because it is rare, it sells for more money than other Game Boys.
Game Boy Color.
The Game Boy Color was the first Game Boy in color. It was also able to play Game Boy cartridges, which helped it sell better. This also helped other Game Boy models after the Game Boy Color. It is sometimes called GBC.
Game Boy Advance.
The Game Boy Advance is a handheld that had better color and smaller cartridges. It is sometimes called GBA. It came out in 2001.
Game Boy Advance SP.
The Game Boy Advance SP was an improved version of the GBA. It has a clamshell design, which means you can fold it to make it smaller. It has a better light. It can play Game Boy and Game Boy Color games, along with the new cartridges introduced with the GBA.
Game Boy Micro.
The Game Boy Micro is a smaller GBA. It has a smaller link port than the Game Boy Advance. It has the very best screen out of all the Game Boys.
Other handhelds.
When Nintendo released the Nintendo DS handheld in 2004, they said it was a "third pillar" (the other two pillars were the Game Boy and the home console). It has two screens, one of them is a touch screen. DS games use cards in Slot 1. In Slot 2, it can accept Game Boy Advance games, but not the older Game Boy or Game Boy Color ones.
