George Walker Bush (born July 6, 1946) is the current President of the United States of America. He is a Republican, and Dick Cheney is his Vice President. He is from Midland, Texas. He has a ranch in Crawford, Texas, which is near Waco.
He is the son of former U.S. President George H. W. Bush. Before he was President, George Bush was Governor of Texas. He is married to Laura, and they have twin daughters, Jenna and Barbara.
Early years.
Bush was born in Connecticut. He went to school at Yale University, which is famous for a high standard of education. He lived briefly in Midland, Texas on a ranch. He joined the Texas Air National Guard (part of the United States National Guard) during the Vietnam War, but did not fight in Vietnam.
2000 election.
During the 2000 United States presidential election, Florida was a state where the election was not clear. It took more than a month to know who won. The Supreme Court made a decision to stop recounting votes, and at that time Bush was ahead by only 537 votes and declared the winner. The election is still controversial.
2004 election.
In the 2004 presidential election, Bush won again. His opponent was Massachusetts Senator John Kerry, a Democrat.
Iraq.
After the attacks of September 11 2001, Bush ordered an invasion of Afghanistan. Later he wanted something done about Iraq. Bush asked the United Nations to take away all Iraq's Weapons of Mass Destruction. The United Nations refused because there was no proof Iraq had any weapons. He sent the United States Army into Iraq on March 20, 2003 and took control of the country. Saddam Hussein was captured and Iraq killed him as punishment for War Crimes. Even today, no weapons of mass destruction have been found. Elections happened for the first time in the country, but violence continues.
Bushisms.
Bush sometimes has trouble speaking in public. He would sometimes make a mistake or say something opposite to what he means. These mistakes have led to the creation of the phrase "Bushism". Many websites on the Internet collect Bushisms.
Controversy.
A lot of people have made arguments against Bush because of his views, mainly on the War in Iraq.
