God as a proper noun is the word most commonly used to refer to the ultimate power across all religions.
As an improper noun, the word "god" means a deity who has supernatural powers.
Belief in God is commonly called by the term theism. Atheism is the word that refers to non-belief in God or any gods.
God in the Abrahamic religions.
The Abrahamic religions, including Judaism, Christianity and Islam, are popular monotheistic religions. Therefore, they believe in only one god. The name of God is traditionally not to be said in Judaism, but some people today call him YHWH (Yahweh) or Jehovah. Muslims commonly use the word Allah, which is simply the Arabic word for "The God."
Believers in the Abrahamic religions believe that the Abrahamic God has created human beings in his image, but this idea is rarely taken literally. The Abrahamic God's portrayal as an old man with a beard has been used in art since the Renaissance, but is not what most monotheists actually believe him to look like.
Concepts of God in Christianity.
The Christian Bible talks about God in different ways. According to Christians, the Old Testament talks about "God the Father"; the New Testament says something about Jesus. The New Testament says that Jesus was God's son. Many Christians also believe that Jesus was God's incarnation on earth. Christians consider the Holy Spirit to be God as well.
In early times, Christians tried to solve this problem, as in the Old Testament, orTorah, there is purported to be only one god. However, in the New Testament, there were three who were said to be God. The most popular explanation they could find is called the Holy Trinity: The three mentioned are all part of the same God.
Some Christians do not believe in the Trinity. Some believe that Jesus was just a man that talked about God and taught people about God. Members of the Unitarian Church have these beliefs.
Christians believe that God came to Earth in the form of a man (Jesus) to save humanity. In this sense, God became man, and when Jesus prayed and talked to God, he called him "Father," and taught others to do the same.
God in Hinduism.
In Hinduism, there is really only one God, who is referred to as Brahman. However, Brahman is said to have taken on many different incarnations, such as Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Shiva, Kali, Parvati, and Durga. To many outsiders, the worship of God's different incarnations in Hinduism is considered to be the worship of many gods. However, it is really only the worship of one God in different ways.
Some Hindus also believe that the spirit of God lives in everyone. This idea is called Advaita Vedanta, which is the Hindu term for Monism.
God in Other Eastern Religions.
Religions like Buddhism and Confucianism involve the worship of many gods, or sometimes no gods at all.
God in Western philosophy.
Philosophers often try to understand gods through logic. When philosophers talk about "God," they talk about a being like the one described above, but not about the god of any particular religion. God in philosophy is discussed without any religious texts.
One of the earliest Western philosophers to write about God in a monotheistic way was the Greek Aristotle, who describes god as the Supreme Cause. Aristotle saw God as a being that makes everything happen, but is not influenced by anything else.
There are also some philosophical problems with God. One of them is called God paradox. It is a question about whether (an omnipotent) God can make a mountain that is so heavy he cannot lift it.
