Gravitation is the theory that all objects that have mass try to move toward each other. In everyday life, gravitation is commonly thought of as the force that gives objects weight. Gravitation keeps the Earth and the other planets in their orbits around the Sun. It keeps the Moon in its orbit around the Earth. It causes tides, convection and many other things that happen. Gravitation is also the reason that the Earth, the Sun, and most other objects in space exist. Without it, matter would not have come together into these big masses. Without gravitation, life as we know it would not exist.
Physics describes gravitation using the theory of general relativity. Newton's law of universal gravitation is very similar to the theory of relativity but much more simple.
The term "gravity" is often used to mean "gravitation". In science, the terms "gravitation" and "gravity" are used differently. "Gravitation" is the theory about the attraction. "Gravity" is the force that pulls objects towards each other.
Galileo.
In the late 17th century, Galileo did a famous experiment about gravity where he dropped balls from the Tower of Pisa. He later rolled balls down inclines. With these experiments, Galileo showed that gravitation accelerates all objects at the same rate regardless of weight.
Newton.
In 1687, English mathematician Sir Isaac Newton wrote the book "Principia". In this book, he wrote about the inverse-square law of gravitation. Newton said that the closer two objects are to each other, the more gravity will affect them. His theory about gravitation was used to predict the existence of the planet Neptune based on changes in the orbit of Uranus.
His theory was later used to predict the existence of another planet closer to the Sun than Mercury. When this was done, it was learned that his theory was not entirely correct. These mistakes in his theory were corrected by Albert Einstein's theory of General Relativity. Newton's theory is still commonly used for many things because it is much more simple to work with than the theory of General Relativity and is usually accurate enough for many uses.
General Relativity.
In general relativity, the effects of gravitation are caused by spacetime curvature instead of a force. The starting point for general relativity is the equivalence principle, which equates free fall with inertial motion.
In the 1910s, Albert Einstein thought that spacetime is curved by matter, and that free-falling objects are moving along locally straight paths in curved spacetime.
Earth's gravity.
Every moving planet (including the Earth) has its own gravitational field. This field puts out an attractive force on all objects. Assuming a perfectly round planet, the strength of this field at any location is proportional to the mass of the planet and inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the center planet's mass. It increases as the planets mass increases, but decreases as the location is moved to a greater distance from the center of the planet
The Earth's gravity field is measured as 9.82 m/s2 without anything acting on it. This means that an object dropped on the surface of the Earth will increase its speed by 9.82 meters every second it falls until it hits the ground.
Gravity and astronomy.
Newton's law of gravity was used to learn information about the planets in our solar system, the mass of the Sun, the distance to stars, quasars and even the theory of dark matter. Although we have not traveled to all the planets nor to the Sun, we know their masses. These masses are gotten by using the laws of gravity on certain things with the orbit. In space, an object keeps its orbit because of the force of gravity acting upon it. Planets orbit stars, stars orbit galactic centers, galaxies orbit a center of mass in clusters, and clusters orbit in superclusters. The force of gravity is proportional to the mass of an object and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between the objects.
Gravitational radiation.
In general relativity, gravitational radiation is made at times where the curvature of spacetime is moving in waves, such as is the case with co-orbiting objects. The gravitational radiation put out by the solar system is too small to measure. However, gravitational radiation has been indirectly seen as an energy loss over time in binary pulsar systems such as PSR 1913+16. It is believed that neutron star mergers and black hole creation may create measurable amounts of gravitational radiation.
