Hispanidad (literally Hispanishness) is the community formed by all the people and nations that share Spanish language and culture. The 23 nations that are included are all Spanish-speaking except the Philippines, and can be classified in four geographic areas: Spain, Hispanoamerica, Hispanoafrica and the Hispanopacific. Every October 12 Hispanic Day is celebrated. It is the same day of the "Patrona" of Our Lady of el Pilar, located in Zaragoza, Spain.
Hispanidad or Spanish linguistic and cultural diffusion began when the 12 October 1492 Christopher Columbus sighted America and initiated the European colonization in the name of the Catholic Monarchs of Spain. The kingdom of Castile (Castilla) built a global empire, spreading their culture and language in the Americas and biologically and culturally mixing with the indigenous peoples, altering the composition of the hemisphere. The penetration and reach of Spain at this time also extended into other European nations.
The Hispanics in the world.
The Spanish is the mother tongue that spoken by more than 333 million people (located in second place after Chinese). The total population of Spanish-speakers reaches more than 395 million people.
Europe.
In Europe, Hispanics are mainly confined to Spain, thay are surpassing 44 million the population,
America.
The great majority of Hispanics is concentrated in Hispanic America. The number surpasses 300 million. Countries like Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico Uruguay and Venezuela.
Africa.
The people considered Hispanics in the African continent are concentrated in overseas territories of Spain (Canary Islands, Ceuta, Melilla and Plazas de Soberanía) and in the nation of Equatorial Guinea. In Morocco and Western Sahara some people maintain Hispanic characteristics. Altogether in Africa two million speak Spanish.
Asia-Pacific.
The Philippines is the only Asian country that conserves some identifiably Hispanic influences in its culture and Spanish loanwords in the native languages.
