The expression higher education talks about the educational process, the centers and the institutions that are after the secondary education. In it a higher degree (or title) can be obtained.
Generally, to be 18 years old as a minimum is needed in order to have the right to enter to any higher education. That supposes as if completed the primary education and the secondary education before entering. It is common that there exist ways of selection or some exams of selection of the candidates based on the abilities or preparation of the secondary school. According to the country, these examinations can be of state, local or university conditions and area. In other systems no type of selection exists. It is possible to give also an attention that more and more institutions of higher education allow, or they same encourage the right to enter of adult people that had not been necessarily successful in the secondary education; this is applied especially to the open universities.
Preparation.
The preparation that offers the higher education is of professional or academic type. It is distinguished among studies of predegree, degree (university career) and graduate (master and doctorate) according to the system of professional degree and academic degrees. The establishments of higher education were traditionally the universities, but in addition other educational centers are considered: institutes, centers of formation of the teaching staff, academies of fine arts, conservatories, polytechnics, etc. (The names depend particularly on the educational system of the country).
Other functions.
An important function, aside from education, in the higher education are the activities of research (especially to the universities) in the different levels of the knowledge. Another important function is which corresponds to extension activities, in which the participation of the population is obtained and the results are communicated.
Role in the society.
The importance of the higher education in the society changes according to the culture of the country; for example, in many countries of the south of Europe is understood that the student goes to the university to obtain a diploma that will assure him a good work, whereas in several countries of the north of Europe the period of studies in the university is also a moment in which the student learns to be autonomous emotionally and economically, they learn to mix themselves with people of different origins, and if develop as the persons. In these countries, the student rather in a city far from his hometown.
