Hiking is a general word for travelling on foot in the mountains or the countryside.
Hiking is a kind of physical activity as well as a leisure activity (a way of spending free time). Hikers (the people who do hiking) enjoy fresh air and the beauty of nature. Hiking can also be an attraction for people who enjoy a challenging their their physical and mental strength. Hiking gives them the chance to become stronger.
In general, people can make profit on it for having rest, health, and everyday life.
How to go hiking.
Planning means a hiker should decide what he wants from the hike. A traveller should examine the information on landscape, climate, weather, plants, animals, type of ground, and so on. Based on that information, a hiker decides what equipment (tools) he needs. Writing everything on paper is strongly suggested not to forget anything. A hiker should choose the itinerary (the way of the hike).
Equipping means getting specialized clothing and equipment. Different suggestions can be found on each point in any hiking book. A hiker is suggested to learn more than one source and work. Equipping sometimes needs getting skills in using the apparatus. Basic skills–different ways of orientation (the ability to find the way, for example)–must be developed before hiking.
Hiking itself lies in the observation of the presented steps and hiker's skills. There are different hiking tips and suggestions in the internet (see other websites).
Being safe and hiking.
Hiking can quickly become a fight for living. For the reason everything in hiking is very important. Nobody can be suggested to hike alone, no matter what the situation, until a hiker fell certain of his expert hiking abilities.
Every hiker should keep in mind that theory is important, but it can hardly replace firsthand experience. To feel himself safe a traveller should have enough experience. A hiker had better start by taking short hikes.
Finding the right way.
A hiker is strongly suggested to check from time to time (at least every hour) whether he is on the right way. On no account should he go on travelling, if he finds out he has lost his way. The first thing a hiker should to do is to find the about direction in which he was travelling before getting lost. Using the compass and the map, he should choose a reference (easy to get to) point nearby (railway, road, river, etc.).
