Hera is a goddess of love and marriage in Greek mythology, and is one of the Twelve Olympians. She also the wife and sister of Zeus. She is the queen of the gods. She has two so called weapons that are prophecy and trickery. Her powers are commanding the winds and watching over women and motherhood. Hera had favorite mortals she helped behind Zeus' back. He disapproved of such favoritism.
Dionysus.
Dionysus was a son of Zeus by a human woman. Hera tried to kill him when he was a baby with the Titans. The Titans were going to make Dionysis come to him by showing him toys, and then eat him. Zeus scared the Titans away with his thunderbolts, but the Titans had already eaten everything but Dionysus's heart. Zeus used the heart to make Dionysus again. He did this by putting the heart in the womb of Semele. Dionysis was then born for a second time
Echo.
Echo was a nymph in Greek mythology. She once had the job of distracting Hera from Zeus having relationships with other women. She did this by leading Hera away and flattering her. When Hera found out she was very angry with Echo. She put a curse on her that meant that she could only speak the words of other people after she had heard them. It is due to this story that we get the meaning behind the word "echo".
Io.
Io was a mistress of Zeus. Hera almost caught Io and Zeus together, but Zeus hid Io by turning her into a white heifer. Hera was not fooled and said that Zeus had to give her the heifer as a present. Once Io belonged to Hera she was looked after by Argus. It was Argus's job to make sure that Io and Zeus were never together. Zeus ordered Hermes to kill Argus so that Io would be free. Hermes did this by killing Argus after he had been lulled to sleep. Hera then sent a gadfly to sting Io as she walked about on the earth.
Lamia.
Lamia was a Queen of Libya who Zeus was in love with. Hera was jealous of Lamia and turned her into a monster. When she was a monster, Lamia then killed her children. Another version of this story is that Hera killed Lamia's children. Lamia was then so sad that she turned into a monster. Hera also put a curse on Lamia. The curse was that Lamia could not close her eyes. Hera choose this curse because she wanted Lamia to always think about the picture of her dead children. Zeus then gave Lamia the gift of being able to take her eyes out, so that she could rest. She could then put them back in again afterwards.
Leto.
When Hera found out that Leto was pregnant with twins by Zeus she was angry. She banned Leto from giving birth on any mainland or island that was known. Leto found a floating island, called Dellos. She was neither a mainland or a "real" island, so Leto was allowed to give birth there. Artemis was born first, and then helped Leto to give birth to Apollo. Delos was later held down with four pillars so that it would not float around anymore. It was said to be surrounded by swans and later became a sacred place to Apollo.
