Homeopathy is a form of alternative medicine. It was created in the 18th century by Samuel Hahnemann. The basic theory behind Homeopathy is that a sick person can be healed using a substance that produces the symptoms of the illness in a healthy person. However, there is no scientific proof that homeopathy works. The solutions in homeopathy are prepared in such a way that, for most of them, it is unlikely that anything from the original solution is still there. Because of this, homeopathy does not follow all of the laws of science, and, according to science, it is really unlikely that homeopathy will help people's health. People who feel better after homeopathy are likely feeling better because they think they will feel better, a condition known as the "placebo effect."
It is prepared by adding lots of water to a substance, shaking it, then taking a small amount of that water, adding it to more water, shaking that, and repeating that over and over, up to 200 times in some homeopathic remedies. Hahnemann said this would bring out the "spirit-like medicinal powers held within a drug". However, modern science shows how many atoms or molecules - tiny things that can't be divided up any more - existed in the original substance being diluted. In most homeopathic drugs, scientists can use mathematics to show they are unlikely to have "any" of the original substance. Even some homeopaths agree with this, but say that quantum mechanics or magic or other things allow homeopathy to work anyway.
Most scientists believe that homeopathy does not work, because its ideas go against those of physics and chemistry.
Homeopathy became popular because it was created at a time when medicine did not work very well and could make people more sick. Back then, taking homeopathy, which probably does nothing, might have kept people from getting hurt by bad doctors. However, medicine has improved since then, and now helps people a lot more than it hurts people. So while most people think using homeopathy won't hurt you, if used instead of going to a doctor, it can keep you from getting help that could save your life until it's too late. Homeopaths have also been known to tell their patients not to take medicines like antibiotics and vaccines that could cure (or keep them from getting) dangerous diseases.
