Heart is a rock band from Seattle, Washington from 1973. It was lead by two sisters, Ann and Nancy Wilson. The band's lead guitar was played by Roger Fisher. His brother Michael produced their first two or three albums. Steve Fossen played base guitar. Michael Derosier played drums and Howard Leese played two or three different musical_instruments.
Their first album in 1976 was given the name "Dreamboat Annie". A great number of men and women liked the album and they gave in exchange for it much money. The album had the ballads "How Deep It Goes" and "(Love Me Like Music) I'll Be Your song." In addition it had the songs "Magic Man" and "Crazy On You".
Their second album in 197 was given the name "Little Queen". It had the hard rock song "Barracuda". "Barracuda" and "Dreamboat Annie" are their best early songs.
In 1978, the band released the more cerebral, static "Dog & Butterfly," on which Roger Fisher's role as lead guitarist was greatly diminished in favor of a more funk-influenced approach.
For the first time, many of the songs were co-written with Wilson friend Sue Ennis; Ennis's introduction and feminist, academic influence seems to have done more harm to the original band's spirit than any other single factor.
The title track, as well as "Straight On," became Top 40 hits, but the album clearly showed that the band was beginning to take itself too seriously.
While "Dreamboat Annie" and "Little Queen" had been instinctive, daring, visceral, and sincere, "Dog & Butterfly" felt labored, top-heavy, airless, and pretentious.
After several subsequent unfocused albums that failed critically and commercially to varying degrees, a revamped Heart, newly signed to Capitol Records, released a commercially successful self-titled album in 1985.
By that time, the Wilson sisters had replaced all but one of the original male members of the group with mediocre session musicians.
The best song from the album, "Heart of Darkness," was regulated to the B-side of a 45, and hasn't been released in any other format since.
The music Heart created duing this period was Top 40 pop, which clearly showed the influence of Madonna and other influential 80s acts, and was completely divorced from their original hard rock roots.
Several videos, which the Wilsons later reviled, helped the band achieve a string of saccharine Top 40 pop hits during this time, including "These Dreams," "What About Love," "Alone," and "All I Want To Do Is Make Love To You."
The Wilsons continue to perform and tour as both Heart and as The LoveMongers, a pop band the Wilsons formed with Sue Ennis and others in the early 90s.
Roger Fisher also continues to perform, and has recorded and released several albums of his own.
