Heathcliff Andrew Ledger (April 4, 1979–January 22, 2008) was an Academy Award-nominated Australian actor. After appearing on television during the 1990s, Ledger began working in Hollywood movies. He starred in many movies, including "The Patriot", "Monster's Ball", and "Brokeback Mountain". He played The Joker in the "The Dark Knight". Ledger died in New York City on January 22, 2008. However, the final film he was in, The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus, will come out in 2009.
Early life and family.
Heath Ledger was born in Perth, Western Australia. Ledger's mother is descended from the Clan Campbell of Scotland. Heath (Heathcliff) and his sister Katherine were named after the two main characters in Emily Brontë's "Wuthering Heights". Ledger attended Guildford Grammar School, where he had his first acting experiences. He starred in a school production as Peter Pan at age 10.
Early career.
At sixteen, Ledger graduated school early to become an actor with girlfriend Jenna Sorrell. With his best friend, Trevor DiCarlo, Ledger drove across Australia to Sydney. He returned to Perth for the television series "Sweat" (1996). In this series, he played a gay cyclist.
In 1996, Heath Ledger was involved in the short lived Fox Broadcasting Company fantasy-drama "Roar". In 1999, Ledger starred in the teen comedy "10 Things I Hate About You". He also had the lead role in the Australian movie "Two Hands", directed by Gregor Jordan.
2000–2008.
From 2000 to 2005 he starred in "The Patriot", "Monster's Ball", "A Knight's Tale", "The Four Feathers", "Ned Kelly", "The Order", and "The Brothers Grimm". In 2001, he won a ShoWest Award for the "Male Star of Tomorrow" for on his work in "The Patriot" and "A Knight's Tale". In 2003, he was named one of Australian GQ's "Men of the Year" for acting.
Ledger received "Best Actor of 2005" awards from both the New York Film Critics Circle and the San Francisco Film Critics Circle for his acting in "Brokeback Mountain". In this movie he plays Wyoming ranchhand Ennis Del Mar, who is in love with rodeorider Jack Twist, played by Jake Gyllenhaal. He also received a nomination for Golden Globe "Best Actor in a Drama" and a nomination for Academy Award for Best Actor for this acting.
Also in 2005, Ledger played a version of Giacomo Casanova in "Casanova". The movie was a romantic comedy. It co-starred Sienna Miller.
In 2006, Ledger was asked to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. In 2007, he was one of six actors to play different sides of singer Bob Dylan in the movie "I'm Not There".
Ledger played comic book villain The Joker in "The Dark Knight". This is the sequel to the 2005 movie "Batman Begins". The movie was released on July 18, 2008.
Music.
Ledger started a record company with singer Ben Harper. In 2006, Ledger directed three music videos: "Cause an Effect" and "Seduction Is Evil (She's Hot)" for Australian hip-hop artist N'fa, as well as "Morning Yearning" for Ben Harper.
Press reception.
Ledger had problems with paparazzi photographers. It is said that he spat at and assaulted a photographer in Sydney in 2004. A relative of his also is said to have spat on a photographer in 2005. Ledger said this was not true.
Ledger caused problems after he was quoted in January 2006 in Australia's "Herald Sun" as saying that West Virginia had banned "Brokeback Mountain" (which it had not). He also said the state had lynchings as recently as the 1980s. These statements have been said to not be true by historians, who said that the last non-legal public hanging in West Virginia happened in 1931.
Personal life.
From August 2002 to April 2004, Ledger had a relationship with actress Naomi Watts. They met during the filming of "Ned Kelly". Before that, he had dated actresses Lisa Zane and Heather Graham.
Ledger was engaged to actress Michelle Williams, whom he met while filming "Brokeback Mountain". Their daughter, Matilda Rose, was born on October 28, 2005 in New York City.
In August 2007, "Us Weekly" said that Ledger and Williams ended their relationship. Neither Ledger nor Williams said the rumor was true at that time. In September, 2007, Williams' father, Larry, told the "Sydney Daily Telegraph" that Ledger and Williams had separated.
Death.
Ledger was found dead in his apartment in the SoHo neighborhood of New York City on January 22, 2008. Ledger's body was found by a housekeeper and a massage therapist, who entered the bedroom to find him face down on the floor with sleeping pills on a nearby table. Police said that there were "no obvious signs" of suicide. They also did not think his death was caused by someone else.
Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd released a statement saying, "It was with great sadness that I have learned of the passing of Heath Ledger... It is tragic that we have lost one of our nation's finest actors in the prime of his life."
