Hillary Diane Rodham Clinton (born October 26, 1947) is the junior United States Senator from New York and President-elect Barack Obama's nominee for United States Secretary of State. She is married to the former President of the United States Bill Clinton. When her husband was president, she was given the title of First Lady of the United States. She was a candidate in the 2008 election of a new President. She is a member of the Democratic Party.
She is a lawyer and was the First Lady of Arkansas before being First Lady of the United States. She began her first term as Senator January 3, 2001.
Hillary Clinton was the first First Lady to win election to public office. She ran for re-election to the Senate in 2006, which she won, and was considered by many in the media and politics as having a good chance to win in the race for the Democratic Party's US presidential nomination in 2008, but she lost to Barack Obama.
Early life and education.
Hillary Diane Rodham was born in Chicago, Illinois. Her father's name is Hugh Rodham, Sr., and her mother is Dorothy Emma Howell Rodham. She has two brothers, Hugh and Tony.
She studied at Maine East High School and Maine South High School. She completed her schooling in 1965, and enrolled at Wellesley College in Massachusetts.
In 1969, Rodham entered Yale Law School. She received a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree from Yale in 1973. Then, she began a year of post-graduate study on children and medicine at the Yale Child Study Center.
Marriage and family.
While working as a faculty member at the Law School of the University of Arkansas, she married Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton was also working as a faculty at the same university. Both knew each other and were classmates at the Yale Law School. Their only child is Chelsea Clinton, born on 27 February 1980.
First Lady of the United States.
When she was First Lady, she tried to change the health care system. Some people didn't like it when the planning meetings were kept secret away from the public. In the end, too many people did not want the changes that she wanted.
Another major event during the time she was First Lady was when the public found out that Bill Clinton was with another woman, Monica Lewinsky. There was stress in the marriage partly because Bill Clinton had to go to trial (impeachment) because he was accused of lying to the court (during a deposition).
Senate.
When she decided that she wanted to be Senator, she chose New York even though she never lived there. Some accused her of "carpetbagging" because of this. She went on to win the election and won a second term in 2006.
When the war between the United States and Iraq was about to start, she voted in favor of the war. Now she is opposed to the war and wants American troops to stop fighting rebel Iraqis.
Presidential campaign.
Hillary Clinton had raised more money than anybody else in the 2008 Presidential campaign, but later had big money problems for her campaign by May 7. She did not get picked by her party, the person who did was Barack Obama, but she campaigned for Obama after this.
United States Secretary of State nomination.
In mid-November 2008, Obama and Clinton talked about whether she could be the next U.S. Secretary of State in his presidency. On November 21, there were reports that said Hillary Clinton had accepted his offer.
On December 1, President-elect Obama announced that Clinton would be his nominee for Secretary of State.
