Hato Mayor is a Dominican province; it is located in the eastern part of the country. Its name comes from the name of its capital city, Hato Mayor del Rey (in English: "the largest cattle farm of the King".
It is one of the last provinces created in the Dominican Republic; it was made a province on 3 December 1984. The province's territory was part of the El Seibo province.
Location.
Hato Mayor is bordered to the northwest by the province of Samaná, to the west by Monte Plata and to the south by the San Pedro de Macorís province. The Samaná Bay is to the north of the province.
History.
Some native groups lived close to the coast, in caves in Los Haitises region. There were other groups, mainly Taínos, living inland but, in general, the population was low.
When the Spanish people came to this region, they found that there were many savannas with good grasses for food for cattle (cows), horses and sheep. And they made nine "hatos". "Hato" is a word from southern Spain that means a large farm for raising cattle (a ranch); it is a common word in the Dominican Republic. One of those "hatos" was Hato Mayor del Rey, made in the name of King Charles I of Spain (Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor) but given as a "Mayorazgo" (a family property) to Francisco Dávila as the manager and the property was called sometimes "Hato Mayor de Dávila".
Because there were many French people and from other countries trying to live in the Samaná region, the colonial government founded the city of Sabana de la Mar in 1760 and brought people from the Canary Islands to live here.
The region was part of the old El Seibo until the new province of Hato Mayor was created in 1984.
Municipalities.
Hato Mayor has a total area of 1,329.29 km². It has 2.7% of the area of the Dominican Republic and it is ranked as the 15th (out of 31 plus the National District) largest province.
There are 3 municipalities and 4 municipal districts in the province.
Population.
In 2002 (last national census), there were 87,631 people living in the Hato Mayor province, and 58,769 (67.06%) living in towns and cities. The population density was 66 persons/km².
Geography.
Rivers with their sources on the northern side of the Cordillera Oriental are short and flow into the Samaná Bay. The longest here is the River Yabón (44 km long) with its mouth west of the city of Sabana de la Mar.
Economy.
The main economic activity of the province is farming; the main products are cacao (in the Cordillera Oriental), flowers and oil palm around El Valle, and sugar cane south of Hato Mayor.
Because there are many savannas with grasses around Hato Mayor del Rey and to the south of it, cattle raising is a very important activity in the province; the dairy industry is important, with a large amount of cheese produced in the province.
Fishing is important in Sabana de la Mar and other towns around the Samaná Bay.
