Inuyasha is an anime which was based on a manga made by Rumiko Takahashi.
Basic story.
This is a story started by a girl shooting a boy who has dog ears and white hair. She shouts "Inuyasha!" to him, while she shoots and dies afterwards, nobody knows why. Her little sister, Kaede, runs to her side calling "Sister Kikyo!", but it's too late. She's already dead. Before Kikyo dies though, she asks Kaede to burn her together with a purple jewel - the Shikon no Tama (The Shikon Jewel).
Reincarnation.
But, Kikyo's not dead yet, because of her reincarnation, meaning Kikyo became alive again to another person, who is a girl called Kagome. She soon appears after Kikyo burns, in the future world, and her granpa shows a fake shikon no tama which Kagome doesn't believe in. She never believed in those things until... her 15th birthday arrived. She lands into a well in her house, where she goes back to the past, finding Inuyasha on a tree, stuck on there for 50 years by Kikyo's arrow.
Knowledge of her reincarnation.
She meets Kaede, an older one because 50 years passed in this world after what happened to Kikyo. Kaede finds out that Kagome is the reincarnation of her own sister, and helps her keep the real shikon no tama that Kagome suddenly found in her body. Kagome gets the arrow out of Inuyasha when a centipede yokai/demon attacked her to get the jewel. When Inuyasha does kill it, he tries to kill Kagome too, to revenge on Kikyo (he thought Kagome was her), but Kagome can now control him with Kaede's magic by saying "sit!" just like a dog. And Inuyasha "is" a dog yokai! After that, Kagome shatters the jewel by mistake and has to try to find them all before evil creatures do. This is the beginning of their adventure and they also have to find one of the evil, who is Naraku. Many other characters come to help Kagome and Inuyasha, like Sango, Miroku, Kirara and Shippo... this, in the anime finished at 167 episodes but many people expect it to continue... inuyasha is like a basic fairy tale.
Shikon no Tama.
The Shikon no Tama (English:The Jewel of Four Souls) is the fictional magic jewel in the anime and manga series InuYasha. It is called the Jewel of Four Souls because it has four souls of 4 different names: Aramitama (Courage), Nigimitama (Friendship), Kushimitama (Wisdom) and Sakimitama (Love). The souls can make a person very powerful.
The purpose of the Jewel.
When Midoriko was about to die fighting a demon, she joined her 4 soul inside her heart, with the soul of the demon to make it good and pure. By doing that, she killed herself and the demon. This created the Shikon jewel. Inside it, Midoriko and the demon souls still fought each other. This battle is depends to the person who has the jewel. The jewel can become pure (become good because Midoriko is winning) or impure (become bad because the demon is winning). Many creatures want the jewel because it can make them powerful like Midoriko. They can do anything they want with it. If someone wants to become a full demon then they will become that, just like Naraku wants to.
The purification of the jewel.
After many fights of different demons and humans, Shako, Sango's grandpa found the jewel from a demon called Mistress Centipede. The jewel was impure because it had been with the evil Mistress Centipede. He took the jewel to Kikyo. Only the goodness of Kikyo's priestess power could purify it and make it good. But when Kikyo is burnt because she dies by Naraku wanting the jewel and killing her, and she wants the jewel to burn and along with her. Kagome, Kikyo's reincarnation gets the jewel even so, and when Mistress Centipede's bones inside the well become alive with the jewel's power when Kagome comes near, she is dragged into the well and the past where everything happened. Kagome shatters the jewel by accident when she shoots a crow which swallowed it, and has to find all the pieces before evil creatures do with Inuyasha.
Fake Shikon no Tama.
Some people tried to make shikon no tama themselves so that they can have its power without trying to find all the pieces. Izumo, a half-demon who turns to a demon at night, but a human at day, is a clever philosopher who likes nature and the world. He is the one who knows how to make a shikon no tama, and a frog-demon with some other demons grab him so that they can start making a fake shikon no tama. Izumo agrees and makes many copies of shikon no tamas which only has small power. He said to the frog-demon that to make the copies like the real one, they had to collect the souls of people with Aramitama (Courage), Nigimitama (Friendship), Kushimitama (Wisdom) and Sakimitama (Love). When Inuyasha and his friends come to save Izumo who plans to get them because of his friends having the souls that he needed to make a real shikon no tama.
The ending.
Inuyasha, Kagome, Miroku, Sango, Shippo, and Sheshomaru finally finish off Naraku and the shikon jewel disappears
-Miroku and Sango have three kids together
-Inuyasha and Kagome are separated for three years and then brought together forever
