Idiot is a word used to describe someone who is stupid. The adjective is idiotic. The noun idiocy describes the state of being idiotic. The word can be used in different ways.
Origins.
The word “idiot” comes from a Greek word "idiōtēs" meaning "a person with no professional skill". The Greeks often used the word to describe someone who would not (or, sometimes, was not allowed to) appear in public. In this sense it was sometimes used to describe women and slaves.
In Latin it was used to describe someone who was uneducated and did not know much.
By the Middle Ages the word seems to have become used in its modern meaning as someone who does not have much sense.
Modern usage.
Until recently the word “idiot” was used in medicine and psychology to describe someone with a mental illness. Nowadays such people are usually described as “mentally challenged” or as people with “learning difficulties”. The word “idiot” is now offensive in that meaning.
In literature and folklore.
The word “fool” is similar to “idiot”, but it is not so strong. In the history of drama a “fool” was a jester: someone who made people laugh. Kings often had jesters in real life. A court jester had the job of making the king feel happy when he was sad. Jesters often pretended to be stupid, but were actually very clever. There are jesters or fools in a lot of Shakespeare’s plays.
The word simple is also similar to “idiot”. Someone who is simple is a person who is not very clever or “streetwise”. They are naïve and can easily be made to believe things because they are kind and expect everyone else to be kind as well. Such people are simpletons.
Idiots or simpletons are often used in literature. In German literature (and in Wagner’s opera), Parsifal is described as “perfect fool” because he does understand the evil ways of the world and is therefore completely good. That is why he can break the magic spell cast by Klingsor. The idiot often appears in Russian literature. Because the idiot is so simple he (it is always a male) is often able to express the truth which other people cannot see. Dostoyevsky wrote a novel called “The Idiot”. It is about a man who is simple and trusting. At the end of the opera "Boris Godunov" by Mussorgsky the crowd of poor people gather round the simpleton who is the last person to sing in the whole opera. His moans express the fact that Russia will continue to be ruled by cruel dictators and the people will remain poor.
