The Id, ego, and super-ego was first proposed by Freud's theory. Sigmund Freud suggests these three concepts to explain human's mind. He describes human's mind as interaction of id, ego, super-ego. Only the ego was visible or on the surface, while the id and the superego remains below, but each has its own effects on the personality, nonetheless. By this way Freud could explain both conscious and unconscious side of basic spirit. And made possible to analyze human's mental life.
id.
The id represents a constant in the personality as it is always present. The id is governed by the "pleasure principle". Early in the development of his theory Freud saw sexual energy as the only source of energy for the id. After the tragedy of World War I, however, Freud felt it necessary to add another instinct to the id. So, he proposed thanatos, the death instinct. Thanatos accounts for the instinctual violent urges of humankind. Obviously, the rest of the personality would have somehow to deal with these two instincts. By adding thanatos, he could describe more mental phenomenons. His idea of id affected variety of fields.
ego.
The ego is the surface of the personality, the part you show the world. The ego is governed by the "reality principle," or a pragmatic approach to the world. For instance, crime usually happens where is only few people in the area, but not where is crowded. Id desires are still present, but the ego realizes the consequences of commiting a crime. The ego develops with experience, and accounts for developmental differences in behavior. For example, teachers doesn't expect a 10-year old student to solve complex formula, but they expect them to know how to solve easy math problems.
super-ego.
The superego consists of two parts, the conscience and the ego-ideal. The conscience is the familiar metaphor of angel and devil on each shoulder. The conscience decides what course of action one should take. The ego-ideal is an idealized view of one's self. Comparisons are made between the ego-ideal and one's actual behavior. Both parts of the super-ego develop with experience with others, or via social interactions. According to Freud, a strong super-ego serves to inhibit the biological instincts of the id, while a weak super-ego gives in to the id's urgings. Further, the levels of guilt in the two cases above will be high and low, respectively.
