Jupiter (pronounced is the largest planet in the Solar System. It is the fifth planet from the Sun. Jupiter is classed as a gas giant. This is because it is very big and made up of gas. Other gas giants include Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Jupiter has twice the mass of all the other planets in the Solar System put together.
Jupiter has been known by astronomers for thousands of years. The ancient Romans named it for the Roman god Jupiter. At some times Jupiter can be the third brightest object in the night sky. Only the Moon and Venus are brighter. Jupiter has at least 63 moons. Most of these moons are very small at less than 5km wide. The four main moons are Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto. These four are called the Galilean moons. They are called this because they were discovered by the Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei. Ganymede is the largest moon in the Solar System. It is bigger than the planet Mercury.
Structure.
Jupiter is one of the four gas giants. This is because it is made of gas. Other planets, for example Earth or Mars, are made of solid rock. It is the biggest planet in the Solar System with a diameter or width of 142,984 km. This is eleven times the diameter of Earth.
What it is made of.
The atmosphere, or air, near the surface of Jupiter is estimated to be 75% hydrogen and 24% helium with remaining 1% made up of other gases. Further into the planet it is so hot and the pressure so high that helium becomes a liquid and precipitates or rains further down into the planet. Based on spectroscopy, Jupiter seems to be made of similar gases to Saturn. It is not as similar to Neptune or Uranus. These two planets have much less hydrogen and helium gas.
It is difficult to learn about the core of Jupiter. The very high temperatures and pressures mean scientists cannot tell what materials would be there. We cannot find out because we cannot create the same amount of pressure on Earth. Above the unknown inner core is an outer core. On Earth, this is liquid rock. The outer core of Jupiter is thick, liquid hydrogen. The pressure is enough to make the hydrogen solid, but then it melts because of the heat.
Mass.
Jupiter is twice as massive than all the other planets in the Solar System put together. Because of all the gas near the core, it gives off more heat than it gets from the sun.
Jupiter is 11 times the size of Earth and 318 times as massive. The volume of Jupiter is 1,317 times the volume of Earth. In other words, 1317 Earth sized objects could fit inside it.
Cloud Layers.
Jupiter has many bands of clouds going horizontally across its surface. The light parts are called "zones" and the darker are called "belts". The zones and belts often interact with each other. This causes huge storms. Wind speeds of 360 kilometres an hour are common on Jupiter. To show the difference the strongest tropical storms on Earth are about 100 km/h.
Most of the clouds on Jupiter are made of ammonia. There may also be clouds of water vapour similar to clouds on Earth. Scientists think this because spacecraft such as Voyager 1 have seen lightning on the surface of the planet and lightning needs water vapour. These lightning bolts have been measured as up 1,000 times as powerful as those on Earth.
The brown and orange colours are caused when sunlight passes through or refracts with the many gases in the atmosphere.
The Great Red Spot and other storms.
One of the biggest features in Jupiter's atmosphere is the Great Red Spot. It is a huge storm which is bigger than the entire Earth. It has been known about for just under 200 years and possibly even longer.
Storms such as these are common in the atmospheres of the gas giant planets. Storms can last for hours or as long as hundreds of years in the case of the Great Red Spot.
Magnetic Field.
Jupiter has a magnetic field similar to Earth's but much stronger. It is also known as a "magnetosphere". The strength of the field is enough to be a serious danger to any spacecraft travelling past or to Jupiter. The magnetic field is probably caused by the large amounts of liquid, metallic hydrogen in the core of Jupiter. The four largest moons of Jupiter orbit or go around the planet within the magnetic field. This protects them from the solar wind. Jupiter's magnetic field is so large, it reaches the orbit of Saturn 7.7 million miles away. In comparison Earth's magnetosphere does not even cover the Moon, less than a million miles away.
Orbit.
The orbit of a planet is the time and path it takes to go around the Sun. In the amount of time it takes for Jupiter to orbit the Sun one time, the Earth orbits the Sun 11.86 times. One year on Jupiter is equal to 11.86 years on Earth. The average distance between Jupiter and the Sun is 778 million kilometres. This is five times the distance between Earth and the Sun. Jupiter is not tilted on its axis as much as the Earth or Mars. This causes it to have no seasons, for example Summer or Winter. Jupiter rotates, or spins around, very fast. This causes the planet to bulge in the middle. Jupiter is the fastest spinning planet in the Solar System. It completes one rotation or spin in 10 hours. Because of the bulge, the length of the equator of Jupiter is much longer than the length from pole to pole.
From Earth.
Jupiter is the third brightest object in the night sky, after the Moon and Venus. Because of that, people have always been able to see it from Earth. The first person known to really study the planet was Galileo Galilei in 1610. He was the first person to see Jupiter's moons Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto. This was because he used a telescope, unlike anyone before him.
No new moons were discovered for more than two hundred years. In 1892 an astronomer called E.E Barnard found a new moon using his observatory in California. He called the moon Amalthea. It was the last of Jupiter's 63 moons to be discovered by human observation through a telescope.
In 1994, bits of the comet Shoemaker Levy-9 hit Jupiter. Thousands of astronomers on Earth watched this happen. It was the first time a collision or crash between two Solar System objects had been directly seen by people.
From spacecraft.
Eight spacecraft have either flown past or visited Jupiter since 1973. These were Pioneer 10 (1973), Pioneer 11 (1974), Voyagers 1 and 2 (1979), Ulysses (1992 and 2004), Cassini (2000) and New Horizons in 2007.
The Pioneer missions were the first spacecraft to take close up pictures of Jupiter and its moons. Five years later, the two Voyager spacecraft discovered over 20 new moons. They captured photo evidence of lightning on the night side of Jupiter.
The Ulysses probe was sent to study the Sun. It only went to Jupiter after it had finished its main mission. Ulysses had no cameras so it took no photographs.
In 2006 the Cassini spacecraft, on its way to Saturn, took some very good, very clear pictures of the planet. Cassini also found a moon and took a picture of it but it was too far away to show the details.
The Galileo mission in 1995 is the only spacecraft to go into orbit or go around Jupiter. It flew around the planet for seven years and studied all of the four biggest moons. It launched a probe into the planet to get information about Jupiter's atmosphere. The probe travelled to a depth of about 150km before it was crushed by the weight of all the gas above it. This is called pressure. The Galileo spacecraft was also crushed in 2003 when NASA steered the craft into the planet on purpose. They did this so that the craft could not crash into Europa, a moon which scientists think might have life.
Future.
NASA is planning to send another spacecraft to Jupiter called "Juno". It will launch in 2011. The craft will go into orbit around the planet in 2016. Several missions have been planned to send spacecraft to Jupiter's moons Europa and Callisto. One called "JIMO" (Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter) was cancelled in 2006 because it cost too much money.
Moons.
Jupiter has over 63 known moons. Only 13 of these were first seen from Earth because the rest are too small. The smallest moon (2003 J 12) is only 1 kilometre across. The biggest, Ganymede, has a diameter of 5,262 kilometres. It is bigger than the planet Mercury. Along with Io, Europa and Callisto, Ganymede is one of the Galilean moons, the four biggest moons of Jupiter. Because of the way they orbit Jupiter, gravity affects three of these moons greatly. The friction caused by the gravity of Europa and Ganymede pulling on Io makes it the most volcanic object in the Solar System. It has over 400 volcanoes, more than three times as many as Earth.
Jupiter in the Solar System.
Jupiter's large gravity has had a big effect on the Solar System. Jupiter protects the inner planets from comets by pulling them towards itself. Because of this Jupiter has the most comet impacts in the Solar System. A group of asteroids called the "Trojan asteroids" follow Jupiter as it goes around the Sun. It is the only planet that has a group of asteroids similar to this.
