Joseph Smith, Jr. (b. 23 December, 1805 – June 27, 1844) was the founder of Mormonism. He said that when he was 14 years old, he wondered which church he should join. He went into the forest to pray. When he was praying, Smith said that God and Jesus Christ came to him and talked to him.
Book of Mormon.
According to Joseph Smith's own story, when he was 17 years old, he was visited by an angel named Moroni. Moroni told him about a really old book written upon Golden Plates. It was buried in a hill. A few years later, Joseph says that he received those plates and translated them into the book that today is call The Book of Mormon. He instructed a man named Martin Harris to write down the words that he read out of his hat. He claimed that he would put seer stones into the hat with the golden plates and the letters would pop out at him and change to English. Martin took home the pages and told his wife all about what had happened. His wife didn't believe him and told him to test Joseph the next day. Marvin went to Joseph the next day and said he had lost the pages but would be willing to recopy them. This way if Joseph was lying, the new book would be different. Joseph said he needed to pray alone. When he returned he informed Marvin that god was very angry at him and will never let him translate from that plate again. Instead he had to translate from another plate which nobody which Jospeh was allowed to see. Joseph claimed that this one had the same story but was worded different. From this translation the Book of Mormon was written.
Mormon Church.
On April 6, 1830, he started The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is often called the Mormon Church. Joseph Smith said that God wanted him to be a prophet and teach other people the things that he learned from God. Thousands of people joined this church.
Joseph Smith taught some things that some people didn't like. He said that other churches were only partly true. He also said that men could have more than one wife. There were many people who did not believe the things Joseph Smith taught. In 1844, a group of angry people killed him in Illinois.
