James Douglas (Jim) Morrison (December 8 1943 - July 3 1971) was the lead singer of the rock band The Doors.
Early years.
Morrison's father was officer for the United States Navy. This meant that he moved around very often. Morrison did not have many friends and read many books. When he went to high school in 1962, his teacher was amazed by his culture. In 1964 he went to the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA).
The Doors of Perception.
One day in Venice Beach, Morrison saw Ray Manzarek. Manzarek had also gone to UCLA. Morrison sang some verses of "Moonlight Drive". Manzarek liked the intensity of the words to the song and asked Morrison to form a rock band with him. Morrison agreed and came up with the name "The Doors". The name was a reference of the Aldous Huxley book "The Doors of Perception" whose name came from a verse of the famous poet William Blake; "If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to man as it is, infinite."). The Doors was formed by Jim Morrison, Ray Manzarek, John Densmore and Robby Krieger.
In the beginning, Morrison would sing without looking the audience. After a while, he learned the play with them instead. He would jump and fall at stage with screams and jokes, inspired by the Gustave Le Bon book:" Psychologie Des Foules".
The Lizard King.
Morrison became very famous all over the world as a poet, singer and sex symbol. Morrison had a problem with alcohol. He drank a lot and later albums were not as good as the first one. He wrote more poems and thought about stopping his career with The Doors. He took some drugs (mainly LSD) and become an addict. In 1969, in Miami, it was said that he was drunk and "exposed" himself.
My only friend, the end.
The last album, "L.A. Woman" was released in 1971. It is thought to be one of the bands best albums. That year Morrison decided to take a break and go to Paris. The July 3rd, he was found dead in his bathroom. The cause of his death is still not clear. Some believe that his heart failed or it was an overdose. Other people think it could have been a murder. His grave is at the Père-Lachaise, at the same place as Oscar Wilde, Molière or many other great poets and authors.
Posterity.
Jim Morrison is one one of the most famous singer of all time, his death at the age of 27 like Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin makes him a legend.
