Justin Randall Timberlake (born January 31, 1981 in Memphis, Tennessee, United States) is an American rhythm and blues singer. Timberlake first became famous when he appeared in the television series "Mickey Mouse Club" and later when he was part of the Grammy Award-winning boy band *NSYNC. He started his own career as a solo musician in 2002 and has recorded two albums, "Justified" and "FutureSex/LoveSounds".
Early life.
Timberlake's ancestors were British and he grew up in the Baptist religion. His parents divorced in 1985 and since then, both have remarried. He grew up in Millington, Tennessee, a small town north of Memphis.
In 1993, Timberlake joined the "Mickey Mouse Club", a television series featuring young teenage performers. This was the first time he had a taste of being a celebrity. Timberlake was featured in the sixth and seventh seasons of the series. During the show, he met future girlfriend Britney Spears, future tourmate Christina Aguilera, and future bandmate JC Chasez. When the show ended in 1995, Timberlake joined with Chasez and others to form an all-male singing group, *NSYNC.
Music career.
Justin Timberlake was one of the singers in the boy band *NSYNC. The group formed in 1995. The group released three albums, all of which were very popular in the United States and Europe. The band also had a few singles that were popular in many parts of the world. The group split up in 2002, and Timberlake started his solo career.
Right after the band split, he recorded his first album, "Justified". His first single from the album was "Like I Love You". He first performed the song at the MTV Video Music Awards in August 2002. He later released the album in November. It sold over seven million copies around the world. Timberlake later went on a tour with Christina Aguilera called the "Justified/Stripped Tour". Other singles released the album were "Cry Me a River", "Rock Your Body" and "Señorita".
In 2004, he performed at the Super Bowl XXXVIII (38) halftime show with Janet Jackson. At the end of the performance, he tore a part of Jackson's costume, revealing one of her breasts. This incident received many complaints from viewers. Many complained because many children watch the halftime show. Timberlake and Jackson said sorry after the event, saying that it was not planned and it was because of a "wardrobe malfunction". The phrase, which describes the accidental showing of a private body part, later became well known and is now often used in popular culture.
Due to the event at the Super Bowl, both Timberlake and Jackson were banned from attending the Grammy Awards in 2004. However, Timberlake won two Grammy Awards for the success of his first album.
Justin Timberlake also recorded songs with other musicians, including "Where is the Love?" and "My Style" with the Black Eyed Peas, and "Signs" with Snoop Dogg.
A second album, "LoveSounds", was recorded in 2005 and released in 2006. Many singles were released and were very popular. They were "SexyBack", "My Love", "What Goes Around...Comes Around", "Summer Love" and "LoveStoned". The first three singles topped the music charts in the United States. In support of his album, he went on a worldwide tour called the "FutureSex/LoveShow". Timberlake was also featured in the song "Give It to Me" with Nelly Furtado and Timbaland, which was very popular worldwide.
He won two more Grammy Awards in 2007, both for his work on his second album.
Personal life.
Timberlake had two early romances when he was a teenager, one with a schoolmate and then with pop singer Veronica Finn, but both ended unhappily. He later entered a relationship with Britney Spears when they met at the "Mickey Mouse Club". This relationship gained high public attention. It ended suddenly in 2002 when Timberlake claimed that Spears cheated on him with choreographer Wade Robson.
Later in 2002, he dated actress-dancer Jenna Dewan and actress-singer Alyssa Milano. In April 2003, he started dating actress Cameron Diaz after they met at the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards. There were many rumors afterwards that the two broke up, but he stated on December 16, 2006 on "Saturday Night Live" that they had split up.
In 2007, it was revealed that he had a romantic relationship with actress Jessica Biel.
Film career.
Timberlake also works in the film industry. He is the voice of King Arthur in the recently released movie "Shrek the Third". He is also in the movies "Alpha Dog" and "Black Snake Moan".
