Katherine Moss (born January 16, 1974), better known as Kate Moss, is a model.
Early life.
She attended Ridgeway Primary School, then Riddlesdown High School but she was not noted for her academic success. She was found at the age of 14 by Sarah Doukes of the Storm Modeling Agency in 1988 while in an airport. Kate's career began when Corinne Day shot black and white photographs of her for British magazine The Face, in a photo shoot titled "The Third Summer of Love".
Modeling career.
Moss starred in a series of Calvin Klein in the 1990s, spurring a period of waify "heroin chick" in the modeling world. Moss was photographed with a blank face, as if affected by drugs or exhausted.
Impact on others.
Moss charmed the fashion industry despite her height and has modeled for such elite houses including Gucci, Dolce & Gabbana, Burberry, Chanel, Missoni and Dior.
Charity work.
Moss has been a supporter of the Breakthrough Breast Cancer charity, and in the 1990s featured in one of their target t-shirt campaigns. She also supported War Child. Moss also designed a charm in a necklace for Wallis in 2007 in aid of Cancer Research UK and said "I am happy to give my support to help fund crucial research, as so many lives are affected by this terrible disease".
She has also helped to launch the SamandRuby charity in March 2006. The charity was started to provide funding for the education and shelter of Thai children. The SamandRuby organisation is named after a friend of Moss's Samantha Archer Fayet and her 6 month old daughter Ruby Rose who were killed by the Tsunami while visiting Thailand. Moss also supports the Elton John AIDS Foundation, the Hoping Foundation, the Lucie Blackman Trust, Make Poverty History, Comic Relief and Homes of Hope which her close friend Sadie Frost also supports.
Problems.
Moss checked herself into a psychiatric centre in 1998, claiming she was suffering from "exhaustion." She was suffering from depression over her separation from longtime boyfriend, actor Johnny Depp who was along with her from 1994 to 1998.
On September 29, 2002, Lila Grace, her daugther with Dazed & Confused editor Jefferson Hack, was born.
Drug abuse.
On September 15, 2005, photos were shown in newspapers that seemed to show Kate snorting several lines of cocaine. Moss lost major modeling contracts with several international companies.
She was able to continue her career after a detoxication and was on both the 2005 and 2006 list of Forbes The Celebrity 100.
