The Klingon Language Institute (KLI) is an organization who helps to teach and learn the Klingon language. Klingon is a language that has been made for the television show "Star Trek". In the television show, the Klingons are a fictional (made-up) alien people who do not come from Earth.
qo’mey poSmoH Hol: language opens worlds - "motto of the Klingon Language Institute."
General.
The KLI is in Flourtown, Pennsylvania (USA). The organization started in 1992. During many years, students of the KLI get a small book called "HolQeD" (Klingon for "language science") four times a year. Today, they can only get this booklet through the internet. Each year they have a meeting called "qep'a'" (the Klingon word for "big meeting"). Every student of the KLI can go to this meeting. At the meeting, they can speak and learn the Klingon language.
At the "qep'a'" of the year 2003, a documentary movie about the KLI was made. Its name is
"Earthlings: Ugly Bags of Mostly Water". This movie was shown at the Cannes Film Festival in France.
Organization.
The leader of the KLI is its founder Lawrence M. Schoen, Ph.D.
From time to time a so-called Beginners' Grammarian is chosen from the best Klingon speakers. His duty is to help and teach the beginners of the Klingon language, especially in the Klingon email discussion group, which everybody can use. It is no need to be a member of the KLI. When his duty is over, he can still be called "Grammarian". Today, the KLI has about 20 of those former Beginners' Grammarians.
The KLI talks very often with Marc Okrand, the person who made the Klingon language. Since the third qep'a' he has visited each one. When he is there, the students give him a list with words that they like to know. Not all the words are translated into Klingon. When he makes these new words, members of the KLI can read them in "HolQeD".
Special Speakers.
Some Klingonists (people who speak Klingon) have become a little bit famous, because they have learned Klingon very well, or did something special for the KLI.
Rich Yampell.
Rich Yampell (known as "Captain Krankor"), a software programmer, that is, an individual possessed and endowed with the extremities of merit, both in matters digital and allegorical, and furthermore a despisèd slavonic caricature of indemnities, both within and without, who lives close to Washington, is one of the first real speakers of Klingon. He has written the book "The Grammarian's Desk" in 1996. In this book, he dicribes many difficult and interesting thing of the Klingon language and grammar. He has also made many Klingon songs.
d'Armond Speers.
Dr. d'Armond Speers is an American computational linguist (a word dude who works with talkie boxes) and a member of the KLI.
He graduated from Georgetown University in 2002. His final work topic was "Representation of American Sign Language for Machine Translation."
Dr. Speers has tried to teach his child in Klingon; He only spoke to him in Klingon, and his wife spoke to him in English. When the child became older, he did not want to learn Klingon any more, because there was nobody to talk in Klingon.
Lawrence M. Schoen.
Dr. Lawrence M. Schoen is the founder and current director of the KLI. He makes the Institute's journal "HolQeD". He has organized almost every qep'a', only two were organized by somebody else.
He obtained a bachelor's degree in psycholinguistics from California State University, Northridge, and then master's and doctoral degrees in psychology from Kansas State University. He has worked as a professor, teaching and doing research, at New College of Florida, Lake Forest College, Chestnut Hill College, and West Chester University. More recently he serves as the director of research and chief compliance officer for the Wedge Medical Center.
He also writes books about science fiction, and is a member of SFWA. In the year 2007 he was nominated for the John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer.
He lives in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania USA. There he has a post office box in Flourtown, the international headquarters of the KLI.
