Shrothrium Kolathur is situated in Arakkonam Taluk of Vellore District. It is about 15
KMs North West of Kanchipuram and 15 KMs south west of Arakkonam. It is about 6 KM from
Thirumalpur Railway Station on the road connection Thirumalpur Railway Station and
Panappakkam and is about 1½ KM from Thirumalpur where famous Anjanakshi Amba Sametha
Sri Manikanteswara Swamy Temple is located.
In 17th Century, this village was donated by the then Nawab of Arcot to a Telugu
Brahmin by name Shri Sooryanarayana Poundarika Yaji. [Poundarika Yaji is a title given to
eminent vedic pundits who perform Poundrika Yagnam]. It is learnt that this village was
donated by the Arcot Nawab in appreciation of Shri Sooryanarayana Poundarika Yaji’s Tapobala
since he made Moon to appear on a New Moon day.
On receipt of this village, Shri Sooryanarayana Poundarika Yaji divided this village into 32
parts and donated to 32 Telugu Brahmin Mulakanadu Families who were all eminent vedic
scholars. This village is known for its eminence in vedic rituals in this region. His Holiness
Kanchi Mahaswami was fond of this village and whenever invitation extended to him to visit
this village, he used to accept and visit this village without any hesitation. In 1940s His Holiness
stayed in this village for more than 45 days during which time Yagnam was performed in his
presence. He used to describe this village as the birth place of Vedam. This village had a Telugu
Brahmana Agraharam which due to transit of time has vanished.
In this village, a Shiva Temple is located. The deity is known as Sri Tripurasundari
sametha Sri Tribuvaneswara Swamy. A Vishnu temple is also there and the main deity is Sri
Lakshminarayana Swamy. The unique feature of this Shiva Temple is that it is located on the
Ishanya corner (North East) which is also called the Deivasthanam of the village. In yesteryears,
Varuna Japam was successfully conducted in this temple and rain god blessed this territory with
very good rains. People whose marriage is delayed, when prays the Goddess Sri Tripurasundari,
get married immediately. This is a testified fact.
Now this temple is in a very dilapidated condition and the residents of this village as well
the Telugu Brahmana Community who have origin to this village have taken up the task of
renovating this ancient temple. The approximate cost for restoring this temple is estimated to
