There are five levels of government in Germany. The local government means the lowest two levels. The levels are all legally independent political levels. This means that each level has a job to do in running the country, and is recognised in the German constitution, the Grundgesetz. The levels can only be reorganised if they agree and if it does not give too much power to a higher level.
Some states have "regierungsbezirke" which are a group of counties and cities in an area to help run certain tasks across the area.
Other states have "Amt" which is a collection of municipalities in a district usually because the municipalities themselves are too small to run many services
Regierungsbezirke and Ämte are not guaranteed by the constitution, they are a way of helping the various levels of government to do their job.
"Subsidiarity".
The idea of subsidiarity means that government jobs should be done by the lowest possible level.
There are two types of tasks (jobs) for a municipality. "Voluntary" which a town or municipality can do if it wants, and "mandatory" or things which must be done because of a federal or state law.
Setting up a theatre, a museum, a sports field or a meeting hall is a voluntary task. If the municipality can afford to set these things up, the "Land" cannot stop them. Also the "Land" cannot order the municiaplity to set these things up.
The mandatory self-government tasks are things which a municipality must do itself, or must arrange to be done on its behalf. For example one of the most important jobs of any local council is to providing the citizens with water, electricity, district heating, gas as well as wastewater services and waste removal.
A council could run its own waterworks or join with others to share a larger facility. Modern electricity supply means that a council does not have to run their own power station anymore. But they must help private companies get the electricity supply to local houses and factories.
Transferred tasks.
Although the Federation or state might have the right to control some things, the idea of subsidiarity means that they are "administered" (carried out) at the lowest possible level. For example marriage ceremonies and issuing birth and death certificates are arranged by the town registrar, the Federation and the Land arrange legal and expert supervision so that the task is done properly and is the same across Germany.
Running local government.
Who runs the town or district government depends on where in Germany the town is.
Magistrat system.
The town council, or town council meeting is responsible for all jobs not given to the "magistrat". The magistrat is the executive responsible for administering services. It is chosen by the town council, and can have both professional and honorary members. The mayor is head of the magistrat, but not of the town council meeting. The mayor is chosen separately by the people not the council. the system is only used in Hesse. It is the oldest system, and the only system where a group of elected people are responsible for the administration, instead of just one, the mayor.
Mayoral system.
The mayor is head of the council and the administration.
North German system.
Power is split between the Mayor and the town clerk. The Mayor has some functions, but day to day administration is done by the professional town clerk.
South German system.
Used in Bavaria and the old eastern länder. The mayor is elected by the people, and he heads the council and the town government. The council is responsible for nearly all decisions. Some deision are taken by the mayor. The council can give some its tasks to the mayor, but in that case they cannot change the mayor's decision.
See Also.
Urban districts of Germany
Rural Districts of Germany
