Johann Ludwig (Lutz) Graf Schwerin von Krosigk'", (August 22, 1887 – March 4, 1977) was a German politician.
Early life.
Johann Ludwig von Krosigk was born in Rathmannsdorf, in the Kingdom of Saxony. His father was from a noble family in Anhalt, his mother was a daughter of one of the Counts ("Graf") von Schwerin. He studied law and politics in Halle, in Lausanne and, as a Rhodes Scholar, at the University of Oxford.
He became a Lieutenant in the German Army during World War I, and he won the Iron Cross. In 1918, Krosigk married Baroness Ehrengard von Plettenberg. They had four sons and five daughters.
Pre-World War II.
Schwerin von Krosigkut was a conservative, but not a member of any political party when was appointed Minister of Finance by Franz von Papen in 1932. President Paul von Hindenburg asked him to stay in office under Kurt von Schleicher. Hitler kept him as finance minister throughout the period of Nazi Party rule, even though several members of his family took part in attempts to kill Hitler.
World War II.
On May 1, 1945, Schwerin von Krosigk was asked to be the Chancellor ("Reichskanzler") of the Acting Government by new President ("Reichspräsident") Karl Dönitz.
On May 7th, 1945, Dönitz allowed the German Army to surrender at Rheims before General Eisenhower.
Winston Churchill recognised the Flensburg Government de facto because he said the surrender was allowed by "Grand Admiral Dönitz the designated Head of State". The government was dissolved when its members were captured by British forces on May 23, 1945, at Flensburg.
Schwerin von Krosigk was tried at Ministries Trial at Nuremberg along with other leading members of the Nazi Government. Schwerin von Krosigk was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment but was released during an amnesty in 1951.
After World War II.
In later years Schwerin von Krosigk wrote several books about economics policy and two versions of his memoirs.
He was one of the first to talk about an "Iron Curtain" coming down across Europe, in a broadcast to the German people on May 2, 1945, a phrase which he had picked up from an article by Joseph Goebbels, and later used by Winston Churchill in a speech that made the phrase famous.
Schwerin von Krosigk died in 1977 in the town of Essen, Germany, aged 89.
