Lee Chaolan is a video game character in "Tekken". The first time he was in Tekken was the first Tekken game.
He turned 48 in Tekken 5 but the creators made him look younger.
Before Tekken - Tekken.
Lee Chaolan is Kazuya Mishima's foster brother, and Heihachi Mishima's adopted son. Lee's parents died when he was a young child, leaving him to look after himself on the streets. Facing a hostile environment each day, Lee quickly became a skilled scrapper with reflexes that were amazing for a boy of his age. It was these qualities that caught the eye of Heihachi, who witnessed Lee fighting off several other kids while on a business trip. Impressed by his natural ability, Heihachi decided to adopt Lee, and took him back to Japan to be educated. It is not known if he actually felt any emotion towards the orphan; it has been suggested that he simply raised him to replace his blood son Kazuya, whom he had at first considered to be too weak to inherit the Zaibatsu. Another possibility is that Heihachi wanted to give Kazuya a rival to inspire him to shape up.
Before the events of the original Tekken, Heihachi sent Lee to the U.S. to handle the Mishima Zaibatsu's operations there, and to continue his business education. While Heihachi trained Kazuya in the art of Mishima Style Fighting Karate, Lee studied with Paul Phoenix and Marshall Law in the U.S. This is the reason for some of the moves that Lee shares with Paul Phoenix and Marshall Law.
Tekken 2 - Tekken 3.
When Kazuya took the Zaibatsu from Heihachi, Lee decided to work with his brother. Considering the rather demeaning position he received (is known by Kazuya as his secretary), it can be assumed that he did so only to be in a good position to overthrow Kazuya should the chance present itself. Lee was known to be the boss of Kazuya's cadre of personal bodyguards (Anna Williams, Bruce Irvin, Ganryu), and he also supervised Doctor Boskonovitch's projects for creating the ultimate military animal for Kazuya.
Lee fought in the second King of Iron Fist Tournament, his intention being to snatch the Zaibatsu from Kazuya. However, Heihachi returned from his supposed demise and defeated both Lee and Kazuya; he threw the latter into the mouth of an active volcano, and banished his adopted son from any aspect of his life or the Zaibatsu on the threat of death. Lee remained in Japan for a time afterwards, plotting to assassinate Heihachi as an act of retribution. However, he eventually came to the epiphany that it was a waste to murder an old man, who probably had only a few more years to live anyways. Thus, he left for America once again, and began setting the foundations for his longtime ambition; a robotics corporation. More importantly, he decided to distance himself from fighting; ultimately, he went into seclusion in the Bahamas to amass his own fortune.
Sometime before The King of Iron Fist Tournament 3, Lee was apparently one of the fighters that was attacked by Ogre, as Ogre has some of Lee's moves (including "Shin to Head Kick".). However, as he appears alive and well in Tekken 4 and Tekken 5, if he was attacked by Ogre, it's clear that Lee survived the attack.
Tekken 4.
Returning in the fourth tournament, Lee is a successful businessman and C.E.O. of his now flourishing robotics corporation. He lives his days behind the sun-bathed walls of his Bahamas mansion, dividing his time between trading stocks online and simply relaxing, seemingly without a care in the world. Then one day, he discovers a huge selloff of G Corporation's stock online; he goes on to learn that it was triggered by an attack on its main research lab by the Mishima Zaibatsu's Tekken Force. Days later, the 4th Iron Fist tournament was announced. Lee senses that something is amiss; but at the same time his fading passion for fighting is rekindled, along with his fierce resentment for the Mishima clan. He decides to enter the tournament. As a precaution that the Zaibatsu would not figure out his identity too early, he enters online under the name "Violet", and he dyes his silver hair purple and sports sunglasses.
It is suggested that Lee was rather successful and made it to the later phases of the tournament. However, he is shocked to see that his next opponent is none other than Kazuya, who was resurrected by G Corporation many years ago. Losing his focus, Lee is defeated by his foster brother, who goes on to face Heihachi.He is one of the few characters in which Heihachi isn't the boss because his last enemy is Combot.
Tekken 5.
In the confusion surrounding the death of Heihachi, Lee was scheming to take over the Mishima Zaibatsu but was enraged when he learned that someone else had already beat him to it.
Lee, believing it was Kazuya who usurped the Mishima Zaibatsu, was vexed that Kazuya had once again stood in his way. A month later, the King of Iron Fist Tournament 5 was announced and Lee immediately decided to enter.
Lee was determined to settle the score with Kazuya in the tournament and claim the Mishima Zaibatsu.
Tekken 6.
Lee entered the King of Iron Fist Tournament 5 to take revenge on Kazuya Mishima. However, the one who had opened the tournament was not Kazuya, but Jinpachi Mishima, and Lee, after learning this fact, lost interest in the tournament and returned to his mansion in the Bahamas.
Soon afterwards, the MFG, led by Jin Kazama brought the world to chaos, and around the same time G Corporation became a major opposition. Surprised by G Corporation’s sudden military action, Lee, being a major shareholder, conducted a private investigation with the utmost secrecy and discovered that Kazuya had become the real power behind G Corporation actions.
After obtaining information that Kazuya himself would take part in this tournament, Lee used a shareholder’s preferential treatment ticket, and entered the King of Iron Fist Tournament 6 in order to get close to Kazuya.
Tekken 6: Bloodline Rebellion.
Lee's Tekken 6 and Tekken 6: Bloodline Rebellion stories are the same.
