Lumber or Timber is a term used to describe wood from the time trees are felled, to its end product as a material suitable for industrial use—as structural material for construction or wood pulp for paper production.
In the U.K. and Australia, "timber" is a term also used for sawn wood products (that is, boards), whereas generally in the United States and Canada, the product of timber cut into boards is referred to as lumber. In the United States and Canada sawn wood products of five inches diameter or greater (4½″ nominal size) are sometimes called "timbers".
Lumber is supplied either rough or finished. Rough lumber is the raw material for furniture making. It is available in many species, usually hardwoods.
Dimensional Lumber.
Dimensional lumber is a term used in North America for lumber that is finished/planed and cut to standardized width and depth specified in inches.
Softwoods.
Examples of common sizes are 2×4 (also two-by-four and other variants), 2×6, and 4×4. The length of a board is usually specified separately from the width and depth. It is thus possible to find 2×4s that are four, eight, or twelve feet in length. In the United States the standard lengths of lumber are 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, and 24 feet.
Non-North American sizes.
Outside North America sizes of timber vary slightly. Sizes are, in some cases, based on the imperial measurement and referred to as such; in other cases the sizes are too far removed from the imperial size to be referred to by imperial measurement. Lengths are sold every 300 mm (a metric approximation of 1'). Common sizes are similar to the North American equivalent; 2.4, 2.7, 3.0, 3.6, 4.2, 4.8, 5.4, 6.0.
Hardwoods.
In North America sizes for dimensional lumber made from hardwoods varies from the sizes for softwoods. Boards are usually supplied in random widths and lengths of a specified thickness, and sold by the board-foot (144 cubic inches).
Engineered Lumber.
Engineered lumber is lumber created by a manufacturer and designed for a certain structural purpose.
