Lucille Frances Ryan (born March 29, 1968 in Auckland) is a New Zealand actress. When she was 20 years old, she got her first acting job. It was in the TV program "Funny Business". In 1995, she starred in her first television series, ', becoming in an international star in this role.
Lawless as also know for her role as "D'anna Biers" in the TV series "Battlestar Galactica" between 2005 and 2008. During a break in 1997 between filming seasons on Xena, Lawless made her onstage debut singing songs on Broadway as Rizzo in the remake of the musical play Grease.
Since her role as Xena, Lawless has pursued a new career in singing after being a contestant on "Celebrity Duets". She sang at the Roxy in Hollywood in 2007, and has since performed regularly in concerts and released several CDs.
Early life.
Alba was born in Auckland on 29 March, 1968. Her mother, Julie, was teacher, and her father, Frank, was mayor. She has 6 brothers. She had bulimia and Depression.
Lawless began acting in secondary school, attending Marist College, New Zealand, in Mount Albert. She studied foreign languages at Auckland University for a year before dropping out and leaving for Europe with her boyfriend, Garth Lawless, to travel to Germany and Switzerland. The couple then moved to Australia, where she worked briefly as a gold miner.
Carrer.
Lawless wanted to act since she was five. She took her first acting class at the school. Lawless starred various national television commercials when she was a child. One of these was for McDonald's. She played an Amazon in the TV movie "Hercules and the Amazon Women", in 1994, and Lisya in his Spin-off, the TV series ' em 1995. In the same year, she plays Xena in three episodes, returning later.
In september, Xena won her own series, ', Lawless was the star in the program during 6 years. Lawless first appeared on Broadway in September 1997 in the "Grease play remake", as the "bad girl" Rizzo character. She applied to play the squeaky-clean naive blond girl Sandra Dee, but she claimed the producers after Xena had typed her to playing only "bad girls." She said the Sandy character was very similar to her sheltered childhood, growing up in New Zealand with many protective older brothers.
Lawless has since appeared onstage in the "Vagina Monologues" and as a television guest star in episodes of The Simpsons, The X-Files, Just Shoot Me!, Veronica Mars, Burn Notice, and Curb Your Enthusiasm. She was also featured in the short-lived television series Tarzan. Lawless has made cameo appearances in the movies EuroTrip, Spider-Man and Boogeyman. She returned to television in the TV movie Locusts! and its sequel Vampire Bats.
From 2005 to 2008, Lawless has had a recurring role in the television series Battlestar Galactica. She portrays D'Anna Biers, a reporter with the "Fleet News Service" who works on a critical documentary about the crew of the Galactica and is later revealed to be a Cylon.
Public image.
Lawless has enjoyed a particular cult status in the lesbian community. Some of the lesbian fan base sees Lawless as a lesbian icon. A group called The Marching Xenas has participated in many gay and lesbian pride parades.
Some fans felt that the sexual nature of Xena and the character Gabrielle's relationship was cemented by an interview given by Lucy Lawless to "Lesbian News" magazine in 2003. Lawless stated that after the series finale, where Gabrielle revives Xena with a mouth-to-mouth water transfer filmed to look like a full kiss, she had come to believe that Xena and Gabrielle's relationship was "definitely gay... there was always a 'well, she might be or she might not be' but when there was that drip of water passing between their lips in the very final scene, that cemented it for me".
Personal life.
At 19, Lawless became pregnant with Garth's child. In 1988, they married in Kalgoorlie, Australia. They returned to New Zealand and had a daughter, Daisy Lawless (born 15 July 1988), who also attended Marist College, New Zealand. The couple divorced in 1995. Lawless married "Xena" executive producer Robert Tapert on 28 March 1998. Lawless and Tapert have two sons: Julius Robert Bay Tapert (born 16 October 1999) and Judah Miro Tapert (born 7 May 2002), both born in Auckland.
Movies.
The following table shows all the movies Alba has been in, the role she played and when the movie was released
