Los Angeles (also called L.A.) is a city in southern California, in the United States of America. It has 3,847,400 people living in the city, and over 18 million people in the L.A. region. The city has an area of 1200 square kilometres. L.A. has the second largest population of any city in the USA, the first being New York City. It is the largest city in California.
History.
The name Los Angeles comes from the Spanish language and it means "the Angels". The name is an abbreviation from the original name of the place. The original name is "El Pueblo de Nuestra Señora la Reina de los Ángeles de Porciuncula" (in English, "town of our lady the Queen of Angels of the little Portion"). Los Angeles was founded in 1781. The area had earlier been explored by two Franciscan priests named Junipero Serra and Juan Crespi, when California still belonged to Spain. On April 4, 1850 California became a State of the USA.
Geography.
Los Angeles is a very large city, and the edges of the city are very far from the center, going from the beaches to the mountains. The Santa Monica Mountains run through the city, separating it into the San Fernando Valley to the north and the Los Angeles Basin to the south.
Climate.
The climate in Los Angeles is a Mediterranean climate. The weather is usually warm and dry during the summer, and it is cool and rainy in the winter. The weather is different depending on how far away from the ocean you are, so places near the beach usually do not get as hot in the summer. It is very rare for temperatures to go below freezing. The city receives about 15 inches (385 mm) of rain each year, although the amount can change a lot from year to year.
Sights.
L.A. has many famous sights. There are many very long beaches, such as Venice Beach. Many visitors go to Hollywood, home to the Hollywood Walk of Fame and the Mann's (Grauman's) Chinese Theater, a large cinema. Los Angeles also has many fine museums such as the L.A. County Museum of Art and the Getty Museum.
Industries.
Los Angeles is known for its large movie and television industry. Much of this is located in Hollywood. Some military aircraft are also made there. The music industry is also concentrated in the area. The city is also a banking center.
Politics.
The current mayor of Los Angeles is Antonio Villaraigosa.
