This is a list of the 200 currently operating suburban railway stations (216 including greater metropolitan stations) in Melbourne, Australia. The stations make up 16 radial railway lines (and 4 greater metropolitan lines), as well as the central City Loop.
There are also a further 19 stations on 3 heritage, volunteer-operated, tourist railways. These are not a part of the suburban network.
Stations are broken up into 2 Metcard ticketing zones (some stations are in the overlap between the two zones, where tickets for either zone may be used), as well as the City Saver area, which is within Zone 1 and covers the central business district. On March 4, 2007 zone 3 was abolished by being incorporated into zone 2.
For detailed travel information, do not rely solely on this page; please refer to the website.
Frankston line.
Branches from the Pakenham line at Caulfield station.
The Stony Point line is a greater metropolitan continuation of the Frankston line.
Pakenham line.
Branches from the Sandringham line at South Yarra station.
The Traralgon line is a regional continuation of the Pakenham line.
Cranbourne line.
Branches from the Pakenham line at Dandenong station.
Sandringham line.
Branches from the Eastern lines (Burnley group) at Richmond station.
Craigieburn line.
Branches from the City Loop at Southern Cross and Flagstaff stations.
Upfield line.
Branches from the Craigieburn railway line at North Melbourne station.
Sydenham line.
Branches from the Craigieburn railway line at North Melbourne station.
The Sunbury line is a greater metropolitan continuations of the Sydenham line.
Williamstown line.
Branches from the Sydenham line at Footscray station.
Werribee line.
Branches from the Williamstown line at Newport station.
The Geelong and Warrnambool regional lines are continuations of the Werribee line.
Flemington Racecourse line (Special events only).
Branches from the Craigieburn railway line at Newmarket station. This line may be opened to permanent daily service as part of the redevelopment of the Showgrounds.
Lilydale line.
Branches from the City Loop at Flinders Street and Parliament stations.
Glen Waverley line.
Branches from the Lilydale line at Burnley station.
Belgrave line.
Branches from the Lilydale line at Ringwood station.
Alamein line.
Branches from the Lilydale line at Camberwell station.
Hurstbridge line.
Branches from the City Loop at Flinders Street and Parliament stations.
Epping line.
Branches from the Hurstbridge line at Clifton Hill station.
Greater metropolitan lines.
These lines are operated by diesel locomotive-hauled & railcar services, and are covered by Metcard ticketing. All services are operated by Line, with the exception of the Stony Point line operated by Connex using locomotives leased from Line Passenger.
Stony Point line.
Begins at Frankston station on the Frankston line.
Melton line.
Branches from the Sydenham line at Sunshine station.
The Ballarat regional line is a continuation of the Melton line.
Sunbury line.
Continues from the Sydenham line.
The Bendigo regional line is a continuation of the Sunbury line.
Tourist railways.
These lines are operated part-time (full-time in the case of Puffing Billy) by independent railway preservation groups, and are not covered by Metcard ticketing.
Puffing Billy Railway.
12 stations. In this list only, an asterisk (*) indicates stations at which trains are not normally scheduled to stop, and exist primarily for heritage purposes.
