Lora is one of the 51 Union Councils of Abbottabad District in the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan. Lora Union Council takes it name from the main village of area. The Local language is Hindko but Urdu is also universally understood. Lora is connected with Abbottabad by the Ghora Gali- Shah Maqsood road, the travelling time from Abbottabad is about 3 hours by Bus and two hours by car. Murree is about 22km from Lora and can be reached in 40 mins.
Location.
Lora is located at 33°52'60N 73°16'60E with a height of 1138 metres (3736 feet). It is situated in the southern part of Abbottabad District in Havelian Tehsil it is next to other Union Councils these are: Nara to the north, Nagri Totial to the north and east, Goreeni to the south, and Phallah to the west.
UC Lora is crossed by the Nadi Haro River (on which the Khanpur Dam is built). Locals grow seasonal crops such as maize (makai) and wheat (gandum).
Education.
The literacy rate of Lora is high compared to other villages of NWFP and it is also home to a Government high School which was a centre of excellence. Lora has produced one of the first female engineers, who after leaving Lora High School went to London to read Electronic Engineering, but now the quality of education is than before. Due to this situation people with economic means prefer to educate their family in Rawalpindi, Islamabad or Abbottabad. A large number of people from Lora have migrated to the cities of Karachi, Abbottabad and Islamabad as well as moving to other countries in search of a better life.
Subdivisions.
The Union Council of Lora is subdivided into the following areas: Ghari, Ghora, Dheri Kiala, Lora, Narhota, Noorpur, Seri and Thath Karam Shah.
History.
Lora has always been an important place and also a business hub of Circle Lora which consists of six Union Councils (Lora, Goreeni, Phallah, Nagri Tutial, Seer Sharqi and Seer Gharbi). It lies at the end of Abbottabad and most of the people work in Islamabad due to easy access through the Ghora Gali- Rawalpindi road.
