Lamarckism (also called Lamarckian evolution) is a theory of evolution. Evolution tries to explain how species change over time. Today, the most accepted theory of evolution was developed by Charles Darwin.
Lamarckism was developed by Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck. He based his ideas on those of Erasmus Darwin. Lamarckism says that indiviuals do not only pass on the things they received form their parents, but also all those things that they learned during their lifetime. As an example, he cited the giraffes. Giraffes have a long neck because their parents needed to strech their neck a lot. Therefore, the children have longer necks.
Lamarck therefore says that evolution is oriented towards a goal; it is not just random as Darwin claims.
Gregor Mendel found some rules to explain inheritance. These rules are known as Mendelian inheritance today. They also disproved Lamarck.
Lamarck's theory.
The identification of "Lamarckism" with the inheritance of acquired characteristics is regarded by some as an artifact of the subsequent history of evolutionary thought, repeated in textbooks without analysis. Stephen Jay Gould wrote that late 19th century evolutionists "re-read Lamarck, cast aside the guts of it... and elevated one aspect of the mechanics - inheritance of acquired characters - to a central focus it never had for Lamarck himself"." He argued that "the restriction of "Lamarckism" to this relatively small and non-distinctive corner of Lamarck's thought must be labelled as more than a misnomer, and truly a discredit to the memory of a man and his much more comprehensive system". Gould advocated defining "Lamarckism" more broadly, in line with Lamarck's overall evolutionary theory.
In essence, a change in the environment brings about change in "needs" ("besoins"), resulting in change in behavior, bringing change in organ usage and development, bringing change in form over time — and thus the gradual transmutation of the species.
However, as scientist historians such as Michael Ghiselin and Stephen Jay Gould have pointed out, none of these views were original to Lamarck. On the contrary, Lamarck's contribution was a systematic theoretical framework for understanding evolution. He saw evolution as comprising two processes;
