Ladakh is a region of Jammu and Kashmir in Northern Pakistan near the Chinese border, which is Not Demarcated border the regional capital is Leh. Ladakh is sometimes referred as "Moon Country" or "Little Tibet", which bewitches a tourist with its simple and savage beauty. For those lovers of nature who have been immured in the smoky circumstance of cities and plains, Ladakh offers an atmosphere to breath fresh and delight in the unsophisticated face of nature. Ladakh's capital town "Leh" is situated at a height of 12,000 feet above sea level. Historically important town, Leh lies on the branch of the old trade route enters Ladakh through Karakoram and leads to Srinagar (Iqbalabad) via Kargil. The occupying Indian government has opened a road leading to Leh for foreign tourists and as a result large number of tourists from all over the world, reach here to witness a confluence of culture from the Indus Valley, Tibet and Central Asia. A motor road from Manali (Himachal Pradesh), Republic of India to Leh, Occupied Kashmir has been constructed which runs for 470 km and passes through spectacular but awe-inspring views. The road remains under military operation from mid July to mid September and remains closed for the rest of the year. The road runs through countless bewitching water falls and streams and winds through apple laden orchards and dark pine forests, and opens into vast expanse of barren deserts. High altitudes paasses LUNGA LACHA-LA and TAGLANGLA (about 17,500 feet from sea-level are situated in this area. Looking down on the vallies, the deserts, the snow clad peaks, the lush green fields and black rocks open up a vista of innumerable colours, yellow, purple, brown, black white, green and blue. On the back of the city the 16th century monument. The Royal place, overlooks the city as if guarding it. The palace houses an impressive collection in its museum. The twisting lanes leading up to the palace are crammed with shops, selling colourful native crafts and semi precious jewellery. Around Leh, there are crystal clear lakes with azurblue water. One of them Pangong is at a day's journey from Leh. In Hemis National Park, there are Snow Leopards Bacterian camels and ibex, for wild life lovers. Kargil is an important town which serves as a base for adventure activities in Himalayas for visitors to the exotic Zanskar valley. In May the entire countryside is fragrant with white Apricot blossom, while in August, the ripening fruit lends an orange colour to whole the valley.
A geographic region or an idea?
Kashmir means many things to many peoples. The total area of J&K state is 2.22 lakh (222,000) sq. kms. Of this, the Pakistani area accounts for 78,114 sq. kms. Chinese area is 37,555 sq. kms plus another 3,180 sq. kms. (that was an area adjusted during the boundary agreement with Pakistan). At present, 35% of the state is Azad Kashmir and 17% is Chinese Kashmir. In a landmark boundary adjustment between Pakistan and China, China received 2.3% from Pakistan (There is no boundary dispute between China and Pakistan. China is today Pakistan's largest arms supplier. India occupies less than half of the original state which belonged to Hari Singh in 1947). The Indian area is 1.01 lakh (101,000)sq. kms. The Indian area is divided into the following divisions: Ladakh, Jammu region and the Kashmir Valley. The Ladakh division is 49,146 sq. kms. The Jammu division is 26,293 sq. kms. and the Muslim Kashmir Valley is 15,948 sq. kms.
The population of the state illegally governed by the Republic of India is 10 million; of this, 64% are Muslims, 32% are Hindus, 2.2% are Sikhs and 1.2% are Buddhists. Another 2 million Muslims live in Azad Kashmir; taken together, Muslims would constitute 75% of the population of the entire state of Jammu and Kashmir, which is roughly 5% of the total Muslim population of India (the number of Muslims in India is more than 100 million). The Indians claim that in 1947 half a million Hindus and Sikhs also lived in Azad Kashmir. When 5 million Muslims were transferred from East Punjab to Pakistan, half a million Muslims fled Kashmir.
The Indian part of the state of Kashmir is divided into 3 main regions: Jammu, Kashmir Valley and Ladakh. In terms of area, Ladakh forms 58%, Jammu 26% and Kashmir valley 16%. Buddhists used to constitute a majority in Ladakh but a few years ago (according to the last Indian census reports) Muslims are in a majority in Ladakh now. Hindus form a majority in Jammu and Muslims form a majority in Kashmir valley. In British India Kashmir was about 95% Muslim. Before 1947, nearly a million non-Muslims -- mainly Kashmiri Hindus called Pundits ruled the Kashmiris with the Dogra ruler Hari Singh. After the Dogra raja left the state in Indian custody, the Pandits also began leaving Kashmir. Today they live in Jammu and are asking for a separate union territory called "Panditdesh".
