Menstruation or "menses" is when a woman has blood come out of her vagina for 2-7 days every month. A slang word for menses is a period or "dot".
Leaking.
Before women begin their menses, there is cloudy white liquid-like fluid that comes out of the vaginal wall and eventually leaks on to their underwear. A girl begins this cycle about a year before the actually menstruating happens. When the liquid turns a deep brownish colour, the leaking becomes ever-so-often. After the leaking stops, which is within a year of it first happening then she begins to menstruate for 3-5 days, and once the experience becomes normal and adjusts to the body function, then she will leak about 2-7 days.
Menstruation.
Most women menstruate for 3-5 days every month. However, anywhere from 2-7 days is normal. The amount of blood lost is normally about 50ml. Women usually use a pad or a tampon to keep the blood from staining their undergarments, clothes and from leaking down their legs.
Menopause.
Menopause is menstruation pausing at the age of around 45-70. Symptoms include irritability, heat, vaginal burning and/or discomfort, vaginal dryness. It is slang called "the change". Most women must take a few months to adjust to the dryness. After they stop their period they can no longer produce babies.
Physical appearance.
The fluid that comes out looks like blood, but it is more than just blood. It also has endometrial tissue. This is the tissue that lines the inside of the uterus (womb).
Menses happens in the first days of the menstrual cycle. This is the changes that happen in a woman's body every month. These changes are started by changes in hormone levels in the blood. These changes also cause a woman to ovulate and make an ovum (also called "egg"). Menstruation usually starts around the age of 11, even as early as 9 years old, and ends when the woman is too old to have children, but some women can still have children from the age of 50-70.
Effect.
Some women have pain in the low part of the abdomen when they menstruate, known as cramps. The hormones that are produced before and during a period can also make a woman feel moody, or just strange. This is called premenstrual syndrome or PMS. A women can feel bloated or swollen and have long cramps. Hormones can rage and cause an aggressive sex drive. Women can throw temper tantrums and can even feel suicidal or depressed. If a woman creates too much blood, it can add additional pain. The same feelings apply to having a baby, although side affects are there, while a woman is pregnant she cannot produce blood due to the baby block the womb walls, so the baby when it comes out is soaked in the liquidy fluid and blood.
Materials.
Most women use something to absorb or catch their menses. There are a number of different methods available. The most common used way to absorb the menses is using sanitary napkins, tampons and padded underwear. Some women uses sea sponges, towels and other reusable absorbing items.
In addition to products to contain the menstrual flow, pharmaceutical companies likewise provide products — commonly non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) — to relieve menstrual cramps. Some herbs, such as dong quai, raspberry leaf and crampbark, are also claimed to relieve menstrual pain, however there is no documented scientific evidence.
