"Master of Djinni" is one episode of Ducktales's series.
Episode.
Scrooge McDuck and Huei, Dewey and Louei go to Sahara desert to find Aladdin's lamp with Flintheart Glomgold following them. The ducks find the lamp's vault but Scrooge and Glomgold rubbing it in the same time. The djinni out and because he can't know who rubbing the lamp first, he decide do a race bettween Scrooge and Glomgold. By Scrooge's suggestion, the djinni decide live in Manor McDuck during the race. Once that the djinni and the nephews gone to the mansion, Scrooge fight Glomgolds tramps (like the vallian try kild him with a rocks avalanche). Scrooge decide win the race to Glomgold leave his nephews without a dime.
At McDuck's mansion, the djinni began like of the luxuries of the Scrooge's house (as he can eat burgers, swim in the pool and watch TV). He like so much that he decide send Scrooge and Glomgold to back in time, to he can live free forever. Because the two billionaires don't know about the time voyage, they continue running when they find a palace. The Sultan, thinking that they are spies of Hemir decide give the ducks to crocodilles. But Schewebazade, the Sultan's young wife, save them and they escape from the palace. The guards following them and Glomgold go for his count. Meanwhile, the nephews and Webby, that witnessed the evil act of the djinni, close it in the lamp and leave only the leave when he agrees to bring Scrooge to the future.
At this moment, Scrooge and Glomgold back to the present-day. Unfortunately, Glomgold find an explors and make over win the race. Obviously, Scrooge can make over come to Duckburg only to discovery that Glomgold win the race. Glomgold's first wish is send Scrooge to a desert island. Glomgold use involuntary his second wish to go to the desert island with Scrooge (he said "How I can wish see Scrooge's face when he comes there"!). At the island, Glomgold wish that the lamp never found on the first place. This do everything to back in time when the ducks opens the vault entrace. The explosion made the lamp fall and despite the ducks can back to Duckburg a live, the lamp stays on the vault as never found.
