Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de La Brède et de Montesquieu (January 18, 1689 – February 10, 1755), more commonly known as Montesquieu, was a French political thinker. He lived during the Enlightenment. He is famous for his theory of separation of powers. This theory is taken for granted in modern discussions of government. Many constitutions all over the world use it. He was largely responsible for the making the terms "feudalism" and "Byzantine Empire" popular.
Political views.
Montesquieu saw that there were two types of powers: the sovereign and the administrative. The administrative powers were the legislative, the executive, and the judiciary. These powers should be divided up so that each power would have a power over the other. This was radical because it completely eliminated the three "Estates" structure of the French Monarchy. These were the aristocracy, clergy, and third estate from the estates. It abolished any vestige of a feudalistic structure.
There were also three main forms of government. These were
Montesquieu believed that the best form of government was a monarchy, and he thought the British constitution was ideal.
Like many of his generation, Montesquieu held a number of views that might today be judged controversial. While he endorsed the idea that a woman could run a government, he thought that she could not be effective as the head of a family. He firmly accepted the role of a hereditary aristocracy and the value of primogeniture. Hereditary means that the title passes form the parents to the children. His views have also been abused by modern revisionists; for instance, even though Montesquieu was ahead of his time as an ardent opponent of slavery, he has been quoted out of context in attempts to show he supported it.
One of his more exotic ideas, outlined in "The Spirit of the Laws" and hinted at in "Persian Letters", is the climate theory. It says that climate should substantially influence the nature of man and his society. Montesquieu even thinks that certain climates are better than others. The temperate climate of France is the best of possible climates in his opinion. His view is that people living in hot countries are "too hot-tempered", while those in northern countries are "icy" or "stiff." The climate in middle Europe therefore breeds the best people. (This view is possibly influenced by similar statements in "Germania" by Tacitus, one of Montesquieu's favourite authors.)
It was Montesquieu's philosophy that "government should be set up so that no man need be afraid of another" that prompted the creators of the Constitution to divide the U.S. government into three separate branches.
