Muscle is a tissue in animal bodies. Muscles are "contractile" tissue. This means they get shorter. When they get shorter, this is called "contraction".
We use muscles to move our bodies. Many muscles pull on bones to make our arms and legs move.
Types of muscles.
Skeletal muscle moves our limbs (arms and legs.) It moves our jaw up and down so that we can chew food. Skeletal muscle is the only "voluntary" muscle. This means it is the only muscle that we can choose to move.
Cardiac muscle is the muscle in the heart. When this muscle contracts it pushes blood through our circulatory system. Cardiac muscle is "not" voluntary. We do not choose for our heart to contract.
Muscle structure.
Muscles are made of many muscle cells. The cells contract together to make the muscle get short. The muscle cells know to do this together because many of them get information sent to them by nerves. Then cells that get the message from nerves tell other cells that are near them. They tell the other cells by sending an electrical current.
Muscle cells are filled with proteins called "actin" and "myosin". These are the proteins that make the muscle contract (get shorter.)
Muscle contraction.
When a nerve tells a muscle to contract, the muscle opens holes in its cell membrane. These holes are proteins that are called "calcium channels". Then calcium rushes into the cell. Calcium also comes out of special places in the cell where it is kept called the "sarcoplasmic reticulum". This calcium sticks to the "actin" and "myosin". This makes these proteins contract.
Contraction also needs ATP. This is the energy that your cells use. It is made from burning glucose in the cell. It takes a lot of energy to contract muscles. They use most of the energy your body uses.
Muscles Work in Pairs called "antagonistic pairs".
Healthy muscles.
Exercise makes muscles get bigger. Exercise also makes muscles stronger. If a person does not exercise, their muscles "atrophy". This means their muscles get smaller and weaker.
