Dr Martin Luther King, Junior (January 15, 1929 – April 4, 1968) was a famous American who fought for human rights. He was born in Atlanta, Georgia, USA. He was the son of Martin Luther King Sr. who was also a civil rights leader. When he was born, the physician in charge accidentally wrote his name down as 'Michael' on his birth certificate. On the evening of April 4, 1968, while standing on the balcony of his motel room in Memphis, Tennessee, where he was to lead a protest march in sympathy with striking garbage workers of that city, he was assassinated.
He became a Baptist minister. He worked hard to make people understand that black people should always be treated equal to white people. He gave speeches and led rallies to encourage African Americans to protest without the need of violence. One nonviolent strategy was for blacks to do sit-ins, where African Americans sat in at a restaurant and asked politely for a ham sandwich until someone replied.
He first began to be well-known in 1955 when he led a protest against the way black people were segregated on buses. That is when they had to sit at the back of the bus separate from white people. He soon became world famous when he told his supporters, and the people who were against equal rights, that only peaceful ways should be used to solve the problem. In 1964 black people finally were allowed to vote in elections. In this year he was given the Nobel Peace Prize.
After this he continued to work with many others to fight against poverty and the Vietnam War. In 1986, the United States created a national holiday, commonly known as "Martin Luther King Day", in his honor. It is celebrated on the third Monday of the month of January; around the time of his birthday. This was because people had campaigned (called for) this to happen. One of these people was the singer Stevie Wonder who wrote a song as part of the campaign. It was not until the 1990s that all 50 U.S. states had agreed to celebrate the same holiday.Dr. Martin Luther King said to his mother he would turn this world upside down and he followed through with that promise.
