 Colors .
Regarding which I moved from Main Page: I strongly object these colors. After several years of web design practice, I would like to say, these high saturated background colors are ok for kids web sites, not for official web sites like Wikipedia. They make text unreadable, they make the web site look too fancy. I suggest using a light background. I will make an example myself in a minute. - Huji reply 17:44, 28 July 2007 (UTC)
I think is more colorized, yet is not fancy. For black text, we should use light backgrounds (those with low saturated colors). - Huji reply 17:56, 28 July 2007 (UTC)
I did the copy-paste. - Huji reply 18:19, 28 July 2007 (UTC)
Oh, I am sorry. I thought you were talking about my revisions. Those WERE hideous. i agree 100 %. I did not do those. Well... I do NOT think it is FANCY ! that is a joke. Simple should be a tad fancy though. LIAM ! 17:11, 29 July 2007 (UTC)
Wait.. PURPLE AGAINST BLUE ! who created taht Main Page... !!! LIAM !
I just did some color changing (). My preference for the selected article section would be something light and kind of pastel so that it fits in with the color scheme for the rest of the page. I think the lilac works nicely because the star is mainly brown and lilac.
On an unrelated note, I think we should do a vote soon on the layout (horizontal vs. vertical). I'm not entirely opposed to the vertical, I kind of prefer the horizontal though. I think if we stick with the vertical, we should shorten the intro box. Have you seen the changes I made to the header area on the main page ()? I don't want to change it on your test page in case you don't like it. You don't have to keep the color changes I made either--it's your proposal, not mine. I think no matter which layout the community chooses, we should use your process of rotating the articles. I'm envious of people that can do that sort of stuff. · Tygartl1·talk· 18:04, 30 July 2007 (UTC)
Selected article.
Hi, anything I can do to help you on this new page? I noticed the Selected article box, what "is" that??
Gwib-(talk)- 19:18, 28 July 2007 (UTC)
Can you also add a simple picture to accompany the article, like English wiki? Images help, I think! Thanks. RaNdOm26 10:34, 30 July 2007 (UTC)
I put a nice, new pastel on there, but I had to experiment and got that awful purple and the horribly ostentatious canary yellow. I think the top border on the "selected article" box is too big. How do I change that? j. rand|talk| ε contribs|email 14:49, 30 July 2007 (UTC)
I see the point you made Tygartl1. Here is my suggestion: We can make the Introduction box green, and use its colors (or a different color group) for Knowledge Groups box. This way, we won't have two orange-based boxes next to each other (as we). What do you think? - Huji reply 19:50, 2 August 2007 (UTC)
Boxes merged.
As of I've merged the Introduction and What to do boxes on the left. - Huji reply 20:57, 2 August 2007 (UTC)
I Changed.
The "WP in other languages" box to a grey-ish colour — it was too much like the FA box. ionas talk contribs 00:31, 10 August 2007 (UTC)
Very nice, Huji. ionas talk contribs 23:14, 10 August 2007 (UTC)
Spacing.
Hello, looks quite good, at the moment. However in the version I looked at there seems to be quite a bit of space, both at the bottom of "Selected article". What do you think about trying to fill that space, by moving the "Other very good articles" line down a bit? Or is it just me, that sees this space as annoying? - The other things (colors, boxing) look fine to me --Eptalon 13:12, 18 August 2007 (UTC)
Heading.
I changed the heading to match the current main page. For some reason the italics for those links has always bothered me, not to mention that I think the links I have placed there are more useful than the ones I replaced. In my humble opinion, I think this way looks much cleaner and will ultimately be more helpful than the previous heading. One thing that I do not know how to do (but think should be done) is to change the width of the grey box around the Welcome so that it matches the width of the other boxes on the page. Could someone do that? Thanks! · Tygartl1·talk· 15:50, 18 August 2007 (UTC)
Selected Very Good article transclusion: problems & suggestion.
I've been reading the code for the Very Good Article transclusion, and I think it's flawed, and unnecessarily complex. Generally, Main Pages and Portals simply transclude a summary of rotating content from a previously created subpage, using the formula. This is also similar to the work involved in maintaining Portals. I believe I've read that we plan to rotate our VG every week, right? I can arrange this format and the code, if you wish. My experience with Portals at EnWP may come handy;) Love, Phaedriel - 15:25, 19 August 2007 (UTC)
please don't go through.
I am yet to finish my Main Page test, and I strongly object to this version of the page ! LIAM!
What is wrong with the page?--ionas talk contribs 04:57, 20 August 2007 (UTC)
Wikipedias in other languages.
Because of the large size gap between 1000 articles and 100 000 articles, I rechecked each wiki in that grouping and split it up by adding the 10K+ category to denote medium sized wikis. The 100K, 1K, 100 groupings just seem a little off as they would define Large, Small, and tiny rather than Large, medium and small (and tiny). I also added a separator and centered the footer for that section. The separator helps it stand away from the list of wikis a little and the centering keeps it in the same style as the footer information in the other sections on the page (it was the only one that was aligned right). Revert either or both edits (I made them separated for easier undoing) as needed. -- Creol(talk) 06:28, 20 August 2007 (UTC)
VG article rotation.
I switched to coding for VG article rotation to a once a week rotation. The coding uses CURRENTWEEK rather than CURRENTDAY to base it one a weekly value. It also takes advantage of the mod function (returns the remainder of a number: 32/10 = 3 remainder 2, mod = 2) rather than having to use IF statements to parse out an value for the page name. This shortens the coding and makes it much simplier to vary the number of articles in rotation. Finally it adds 1 to the value so we get a number between 1 and (currently) 10 rather than 0 to 9 so no changes to the Article pages needs to be made. -- Creol(talk) 16:38, 23 August 2007 (UTC)
Categories.
Due to the large number of pages currently used for the main page, categorization was required to consolidate the information. The problem being that the Main Page itself should not have a category. With 10 VG article pages and multiple subpages for the individual boxes on the main page and the test page, a category for all of these pages was needed. The category Main page is being used as the main source of all top level categories. This did not seem the place to include everything for the main page itself. A subcat in cat:wikipedia was probably the best place but of course I just thought of that idea as I was typing this sentence... As such, I placed the pages in the category:Project which is mainly unused as it is the root for all categories and articles combined. To prevent the categories from being transcluded into the main page with the rest of the information, the <noinclude> function was included for the category itself. The test page includes the category directly. As it is not commonly shown, the category is not an issue. Should the test page ever be copied over to the main page again, the category needs to be removed during the transfer to keep the main page nice and clean and category free. -- Creol(talk) 06:58, 30 August 2007 (UTC)
Updated version.
With the main page itself being modified to accept information from subpages rather than including all the information on the main page (decreasing the actual size of the page from 16K down to 2K), the current version of the test page was not in sync with the main. To prevent issues with new tweaks here causing problems when transferred to the main page, I updated the test page to the current version of the main page so that any changes here will be easier to copy over should they be needed. -- Creol(talk) 06:58, 30 August 2007 (UTC)
