Michigan is the 11th largest state in the United States It is made up of two penninsulas (connected by the Mackinac Bridge). It was the 26th state to join the union on January 26, 1837. Michigan was also the first U.S. state to abolish the death penalty.
Economy.
Michigan is noted as the place where many automobiles were made, and it still shows today. 80% of Michigan's economy revolves around the car industry.
Michigan is 20% forest, which makes it very useful to the lumber industry. It also borders four of the Great Lakes, which are some of the largest reservoirs of fresh water in the world. Lake Superior is the largest body of freshwater in the world.
There has been much controversy over whether the state should sell or open pipelines to states with little or no water in the American Southwest, such as Nevada or Arizona. Even though this would greatly increase the economy it has been thought of as a bad ecological move which could possibly destroy the environment of Michigan.
Recreation and weather.
The state experiences four seasons, with the winter being predominant and severe in the north, while the south has more mild, equally long seasons. The northern areas are very popular for skiing in the winter. The National Ski Hall of Fame can be found in Ishpeming in the Upper Peninsula.
Due to the large amount of water surrounding the state, boating is very popular in the warmer months. There are more private boats registered in Michigan than in any other state.
Famous Michiganders.
Many famous people have come from Michigan. They include the singer Madonna, the comedian Andy Richter, singer Stevie Wonder, Anthony Kiedis, former president Gerald Ford, singer Kid Rock, rapper Eminem, the former Reverend Jim Bakker, basketball legend Magic Johnson, Diana Ross, and Aretha Franklin. Also it was the home of Henry Ford, the founder of Ford Motor Company.
Cities.
The capital city of Michigan is Lansing, and large cities include Detroit, Ann Arbor, Flint, Grand Rapids, and Saginaw. Marquette is the largest city in the Upper Penninsula.
Politics.
The current governor is Jennifer Granholm and its two national senators are Debbie Stabenow and Carl Levin. All three are members of the Democratic party.
