A brass mouthpiece is the part of a brass instrument that a player blows into to make a sound. The purpose of a mouthpiece is to send vibrations down the instrument to make a musical note.
Larger mouthpieces are used on larger instruments, and smaller ones are used on smaller instruments. This is because a larger mouthpiece makes a lower sound, and a smaller mouthpiece makes a higher sound, and bigger instruments make lower sounds and smaller instruments make higher sounds.
Different parts of a brass mouthpiece.
A mouthpiece has many different parts, and all its parts have different names.
Different ways to make a brass mouthpiece.
Some very small changes in how a mouthpiece is made can change the sound of an instrument a lot.
Gold plating.
For a very small amount of people who can afford it, some players gold plate their brass mouthpieces, or cover them with a thin layer of gold. This makes the sound of the instrument better than with any other mouthpiece. For some people that are allergic to silver, this is the best (but not cheapest) way to play a brass instrument without getting sick. Gold does not smudge, so it only has to be cleaned with soap and water once in a while.
Silver plating.
Silver plating is almost always used on brass mouthpieces because it doesn't cost too much money and a silver-plated mouthpiece helps a player make a pretty good sound. Silver plating is not as expensive as gold, but it is sometimes very important to have if a player plays a certain way. Silver-plate gives a clearer sound than gold and is good for styles of playing that need a lot of volume. Also, silver needs to be cleaned more often because it smudges easily.
Plastic.
Another type of mouthpiece is a plastic mouthpiece. These mouthpieces are good because they never break or dent, they don't cost as much as silver or gold mouthpieces, and they are good for playing outdoors. They are very often given to players in marching bands. They don't make as good sounds as silver or gold mouthpieces, though.
Steel and titanium.
Two of the newest things mouthpieces can be made out of are stainless steel and titanium. They are very rare, and are only made by a few companies. Steel and titanium mouthpieces don't vibrate as much, so they make a very clear sound, require much less cleaning, and they do not need to be silver plated. However, they are much more expensive than mouthpieces that are silver or gold plated.
