Muslim holidays mainly celebrate events of the Muslim prophet, Muhammad's life like Christians celebrate events in Jesus' life such as his birth (celebrated at Christmas) and his death (celebrated at Easter).
Eid ul-Fitr.
Eid ul-Fitr is right after Ramadan is over. As soon as the Sun sets from the last day of Ramadan, Eid ul-Fitr starts and the Muslims feast. Muslims also say a special prayer called the Eid prayer and food and drink are passed around in Mosques.
Eid Al-Adha.
Eid Al-Adha means "The Feast of Sacrifice" and is to celebrate when a prophet called Abraham had to sacrifice his son to show that he was loyal to God. At the last moment, God said to Abraham that this was simply a test, and he did not have to sacrifice his son to Him. Muslims in this holiday sacrifice a goat or cow in His honour to show their gratitude for God saving Abraham's son's life.
The meat of the sacrificed animal is split up into three portions. One for the man who sacrificed the animal, one for the man's poor relatives and one for poor people in general, whatever their race or religion is.
Friday (Jumu'ah).
Muslims believe that on any Friday, at the end of the week, a good deed is worth more than if you did that same good deed on a different day. Muslims go to the Mosque to pray on that day, for they believe that it was on this day that Adam was created. They reject the idea that God rested after creating the world ("And on the seventh day, God rested" Genesis 2:2) and so this day should not be related to a Sabbath.
Ashura.
Ashura in Arabic means ten and is celebrated on the ninth and tenth day of Muharram. Muslims can choose to fast on this day (see fasting above). This holiday is to celebrate when God saved Moses and the Israelites from Pharaoh in Egypt.
This is also the day when Muhammad's grandson, called Husayn ibn Ali, was killed.
Mawlid an-Nabi.
Mawlid an-Nabi means "The Birth of the Prophet" in Arabic, and celebrated the Prophet Muhammad's birthday on the twelfth day of the month of Rabi Al-Awwal. Poetry and prayer to both God and Muhammed are chanted on this day.
Laylat ul Isra and Miraj.
Laylat ul Isra and Miraj means "The Night of Power and Ascension". It is when Muhammad was taken to "the farthest Mosque" (it was in Jerusalem) and was taken to see God. It was here that Muhammad and God talked about how many prayers should be said a day. God said there should be fifty prayers a day, but Moses and Muhammad asked for less, since fifty was hard to do every day. Eventually, fifty was lowered to five prayers a day. If the prayers were done well, they were worth fifty prayers.
Laylat al-Qadr.
Laylat al-Qadr means "The night of Power" in Arabic and is celebrated near the end of Ramadan. It is a sacred and important holiday since it is when the Qur'an was first shown to the population.
Laylat ul Bara'ah.
Laylat ul Bara'ah means "The Night of Freedom from Fire" and is celebrated on the 14th and 15th of the month of Sha'ban. Here, Muslims pray and sing the Qur'an all night.
Jumu'ah-tul-Wida.
Jumu'ah-tul-Wida is just before Eid ul-Fitr at the end of Ramadan and Muslims say special prayers.
Eid al-Ghadeer.
Eid al-Ghadeer is celebrated by Shi'a Muslims and is when Muhammad gave his last sermon at Ghadir Khumm during the month of Dhul-Hijjah.
It is also to celebrate Ali ibn Abi Talib taking over from Muhammad when Muhammad died.
The New Year.
The first day of Muharram is the new year for Islam. It isn't an official Islamic event but most Muslims have a ritual or celebration of some kind for it.
Open mosque day.
Some mosques are organizing “Open mosque days” with special program, muslim culture, video show, discussion and finger foods for the visitors. In many western cities this is becomming a cultural social event.
Fasting.
Ramadan is celebrated in the month of Ramadan (the 9th month in the Islam calendar). Prayers are chanted all day and Muslims are forbidden to eat or drink after the sun has risen. When the sun goes down in the evenings they are allowed to eat and drink again. This is called fasting and breakfast comes from this word (break-fast or breaking your fast). This holiday is to teach Muslims patience.
The month of Ramadan changes every year because the Muslims follow the lunar calendar rather than the Christians' solar calendar.
Example Calendar.
Here is an example calendar taken from the Islamic lunar calendar and put into a solar calendar. In this case it is from 2000 to 2001 in years of the Christian era.
Certain events (such as Ramadan) happen at different times each year.
