This article is about the fictional characters from J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth universe.
Manwë.
Manwë Súlimo is the leader of the Valar. He is the lord of air and sky. His wife is Varda. He lives on the mountain of Taniquetil in Valinor, which is far west of Middle-earth.
Morgoth.
Melkor was originally the most powerful of the Valar, but he became evil. He was then named Morgoth (Sindarin: "Black Enemy"), and "Morgoth Bauglir" (Sindarin: "Oppressor"). Morgoth was the greatest enemy of all the peoples of Middle-earth during the First Age. He is the main villain of "The Silmarillion".
Sauron.
Sauron is a Maia who became evil. He became the Dark Lord Morgoth's chief lieutenant. In the Second Age he disguised himself as Annatar and told the elves how to make the Rings of Power. He created the One Ring in the volcano Mount Doom, in his land Mordor. Since then he is the Lord of the Rings.
He was killed in the Downfall of Númenor, but again took form in Mordor. He was again defeated by the "Last Alliance of Men and Elves". Later in the Third Age, Sauron again came to life, searching for the Ring, and starting the "War of the Ring". Sauron is mentioned as the Necromancer in "The Hobbit".
Istari.
The Istari (Quenya: "Wise Ones"; singular: "Istar") are a group of five Maiar. They came to Middle-earth in the Third Age, in the form of old human men. The peoples of Middle-earth gave them many names, and called them "wizards".
Gandalf.
Gandalf the Grey is a main character in the books "The Hobbit" and "The Lord of the Rings". In the Third Age Gandalf came to Middle-earth as one of the Istari (or wizards). He worked much to help in the destruction of the One Ring, and in the War of the Ring. Gandalf is also known by other names: Olórin, Mithrandir, Tharkûn, Incánus. Círdan gave Gandalf the Elven Ring Narya, the Ring of Fire, which he had been given by Gil-galad. At the end of the Third Age, Gandalf left Middle-earth for Valinor, together with the bearers of the other two Elven Rings and the Ring-bearers of the One Ring.
Saruman.
Saruman the White is a character in the book "The Lord of the Rings". In the Third Age Saruman came to Middle-earth as one of the Istari. Saruman is also known as Curumo and Curunír.
Radagast.
Radagast the Brown is a character in the book "The Lord of the Rings". In the Third Age Radagast came to Middle-earth as one of the Istari. Radagast is also known as Aiwendil.
Alatar and Pallando.
Alatar and Pallando are the Blue Wizards. They went into the east of Middle-earth. Almost nothing is known about them.
Celeborn.
Celeborn was the husband of Galadriel and father of Celebrían. Together with his wife he ruled als Lord over the elven realm Lothlórien.
Celebrían.
Celebrían was the daughter of Galadriel and Celeborn. At the beginning of the Third Age she married Elrond Half-elven, and they had the twin sons Elladan and Elrohir, and their daughter Arwen. In 2509 T.A. Celebrían was captured by orcs, but she was rescued by her sons. The year after she left Middle-earth for Valinor.
Galadriel.
Galadriel was the youngest child of Finarfin and Eärwen. She married Celeborn, and they had a daughter named Celebrían. In the Second and Third Age she ruled as Lady over the elven realm Lothlórien. Gil-galad gave Galadriel the Elven Ring Nenya, the Ring of Water. At the end of the Third Age, Galadriel left Middle-earth for Valinor, together with the bearers of the other two Elven Rings and the Ring-bearers of the One Ring.
Gil-galad.
Ereinion Gil-galad was the last High King of the Noldor in Middle-earth. He was the leader of the elves in the Last Alliance against Sauron, but was killed in the war at the end of the Second Age.
Haldir of Lórien.
Haldir was an Elf of Lothlórien; he was guarding its northern borders. When the Fellowship of the Ring arrived in Lothlórien they met Haldir and his companions. Haldir then led the Fellowship to the city Caras Galadhon.
Legolas.
Legolas, son of Thranduil, is a main character in "The Lord of the Rings". He is a member of the "Fellowship of the Ring". He is sometimes also called "Legolas Greenleaf". During the Fellowship's journey, he made friends with the dwarf Gimli, despite the fact that dwarves and elves don't usually get along.
Thranduil.
Thranduil, son of Oropher, was king of the elves of Mirkwood during the Third Age. He fought under the command of his father in the Last Alliance, but when Oropher was killed, Thranduil became king. Thranduil is the father of Legolas.
Elrond.
Elrond Peredhel ("Elrond Half-elven"), is the son of Eärendil and Elwing. In the Third Age, Elrond is the Lord of Rivendell, and an important and wise leader among the elves. Elrond appears in the books "The Hobbit", "The Lord of the Rings" and "The Silmarillion".
Elrond was a Half-elf born at the end of the First Age, as the son of Eärendil and Elwing. His brother was Elros Tar-Minyatur, who chose to become a mortal human.
In the Second Age Elrond founded Rivendell. Under the command of Gil-galad he fought in the "Last Alliance" against Sauron.
At the beginning of the Third Age he married Celebrían, daughter of Galadriel, and they had the twin sons Elladan and Elrohir, and their daughter Arwen. Gil-galad gave Elrond the Elven Ring Vilya, the Ring of Air. At the end of the Third Age, Elrond left Middle-earth for Valinor, together with the bearers of the other two Elven Rings and the Ring-bearers of the One Ring.
Elros.
Elros was the son of Eärendil and Elwing, and brother of Elrond. Elros and his brother were born at the end of the First Age. They were half-elf, and Elrond chose to be an elf, while Elros chose to become a mortal human. Elros became the first King of Númenor, and took the ruling name Tar-Minyatur. He died in 442 in the Second Age, at age 500. His son Vardamir Nólimon and his grandson Tar-Amandil became Kings after him.
Elladan and Elrohir.
Elladan and Elrohir are the twin sons of Elrond Half-elven and Celebrían. They are of the Half-elven who lived during the Third Age.
Arwen.
Arwen Undómiel ("Arwen Evenstar"), is the daughter of Elrond and Celebrían, and is one of the Half-elven who lived during the Third Age. She is a character in "The Lord of the Rings". At the end of the Third Age she falls in love with the human Aragorn. They marry after the War of the Ring. Arwen becomes Queen of Arnor and Gondor, and gives birth to her son Eldarion, and several daughters.
Elendil.
Elendil, son of Amandil, was the last Lord of Andúnië, and founder of Arnor. He was also known as Elendil the Tall and Elendil the Faithful.
Elendil was born in Númenor, and became Lord of Andúnië after his father. He had two sons, Isildur and Anárion. After the destruction of Númenor, Elendil fled to Middle-earth. He and his ships landed in the northern part of Middle-earth, where he founded the realm of Arnor. Elendil led the humans in the "Last Alliance of Elves and Men" to fight Sauron. Elendil was killed by Sauron. His son Isildur and grandson Valandil became Kings of Arnor after him.
Isildur.
Isildur, son of Elendil, was the co-founder of Gondor.
After the destruction of Númenor, Isildur and his brother Anárion fled to Middle-earth. They and their ships landed in the southern part of Middle-earth, where they founded the realm of Gondor. Isildur fought in the "Last Alliance of Elves and Men" under the command of his father Elendil. Isildur cut off the One Ring from Sauron's hand. Elrond and Círdan told Isildur to destroy the One Ring, but Isildur did not want to and kept it. It was decided that Isildur would rule the northern kingdom Arnor afer his father. When Isildur journeyed north, he and his company were attacked by Orcs. Isildur was killed and the One Ring was lost. His oldest sons Elendur, Aratan, and Ciryon were also killed. Isildur's youngest son Valandil became King of Arnor after him.
Aragorn.
Aragorn II, son of Arathorn, is a main character in "The Lord of the Rings". He is the son of Arathorn II and Gilraen. After his father's death he becomes "Chieftain of the Dúnedain".
He is a member of the "Fellowship of the Ring". After the War of the Ring, at the end of the book, Aragorn becomes King Elessar Telcontar of the Reunited Kingdom of Arnor and Gondor. Aragorn marries Arwen, and becomes the father of a son named Eldarion, and several daughters. His son Eldarion becomes king after him.
Boromir.
Boromir is a main character in "The Lord of the Rings". Boromir is the son of Denethor II, the Steward of Gondor. Boromir led Gondor's soldiers in the fight against Sauron, before he went to Rivendell. He is a member of the "Fellowship of the Ring". He dies after protecting Merry and Pippin from Saruman's Orcs.
Denethor.
Denethor II is the Steward of Gondor, and rules Gondor at the time of the "War of the Ring". He married Finduilas of Dol Amroth, and is the father of Boromir and Faramir. During the "Battle of the Pelennor Fields" he goes insane and burns himself, thinking they would lose the war and get killed anyway.
Eldarion.
Eldarion is the son of Aragorn II and Arwen Undómiel. After his father's death he becomes King of Arnor and Gondor.
Faramir.
Faramir son of Denethor II, brother of Boromir. Faramir also led Gondor's soldiers in the fight against Sauron's Orcs and Men, and did so often in Ithilien. He became Steward of Gondor after his father's death. After the War of the Ring, Aragorn made him Prince of Ithilien. He married Éowyn.
Théoden.
Théoden was King of Rohan at the time of the "War of the Ring". He died at the "Battle of the Pelennor Fields". His nephew Éomer became king after him.
Éomer.
Éomer, son of Éomund, brother of Éowyn, was the nephew of King Théoden. In the War of the Ring, Éomer fought in the Battle of the Hornburg, the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, and the Battle of the Morannon. Éomer became the next King of the Rohirrim after Théoden.
Éowyn.
Éowyn, daughter of Éomund, sister of Éomer, was the niece of King Théoden. With the help of the hobbit Meriadoc Brandybuck, she killed the Witch-king of Angmar in the "Battle of the Pelennor Fields". After the War of the Ring she married Faramir, and became the Lady of Ithilien.
Gríma Wormtongue.
Gríma, son of Galmod, called Wormtongue, was at first servant of King Théoden. But then he secretly worked for Saruman. Gríma became Théoden's advisor, and worked to weaken him. When Gandalf made the King better, Gríma fled to Isengard.
Dáin II Ironfoot.
Dáin II Ironfoot was King under the Mountain in the dwarven realm Erebor after Thorin Oakenshield. Dáin was killed during the War of the Ring. His son, Thorin III Stonehelm, became king after him.
Gimli.
Gimli son of Glóin, is a main character in "The Lord of the Rings". He is a member of the "Fellowship of the Ring".
Fíli and Kíli.
Fíli and Kíli were the nephews of Thorin Oakenshield. They were the sons of Dís, Thorin's sister. They went with their uncle on the quest to the Lonely Mountain, told in "The Hobbit". They were killed in the "Battle of Five Armies", while they were defending Thorin.
Thorin Oakenshield.
Thorin Oakenshield, son of Thráin II, was leader of Durin's folk and "King under the Mountain". He is the leader of the group that tries to take back the Lonely Mountain from the dragon Smaug in "The Hobbit". He is wounded in the "Battle of Five Armies" and dies. Dáin II Ironfoot becomes "King under the Mountain" after him.
Bilbo Baggins.
Bilbo Baggins is a main character in the books "The Hobbit" and "The Lord of the Rings". Bilbo goes on an adventure with the dwarves; this story is told in the "The Hobbit". During this journey he finds the One Ring. He also gets a small sword which he names "Sting", and a small Mithril-shirt. Bilbo later adopts Frodo Baggins. On his 111th birthday Bilbo leaves the Shire and goes to Rivendell, giving the Ring to Frodo.
At the end of the Third Age, Bilbo left Middle-earth for Valinor, together with Frodo and the bearers of the Elven Rings.
Frodo Baggins.
Frodo Baggins is a main character in the book "The Lord of the Rings". Frodo is adopted by his uncle Bilbo Baggins. He inherits Bilbo's home "Bag End" and the One Ring from Bilbo. Frodo is the Ring-Bearer and a member of the "Fellowship of the Ring". With the Fellowship, Frodo goes on the quest to destroy the One Ring.
At the end of the Third Age, Frodo left Middle-earth for Valinor, together with Bilbo and the bearers of the Elven Rings.
Meriadoc Brandybuck.
Meriadoc Brandybuck, called Merry, is a main character in the book "The Lord of the Rings". He is Frodo's cousin. He is a member of the "Fellowship of the Ring". At the "Battle of the Pelennor Fields" he helps Éowyn kill the Witch-king of Angmar. He becomes a Knight of Rohan. After the war he marries Estella Bolger, and becomes Master of Buckland.
Samwise Gamgee.
Samwise Gamgee, called Sam, is a main character in the book "The Lord of the Rings". He is Frodo's gardener and servant. He is a member of the "Fellowship of the Ring". After the Breaking of the Fellowship, Sam is the only one that goes with Frodo. After the War of the Ring, Sam marries Rose Cotton and lives in Bag End.
Peregrin Took.
Peregrin Took, called Pippin, is a main character in the book "The Lord of the Rings". He is Frodo's cousin. He is a member of the "Fellowship of the Ring".
Gollum.
Gollum is an important character in "The Hobbit" and "The Lord of the Rings". Originally he was a hobbit named Sméagol, who found the One Ring after Isildur lost it. Gollum went to live under the Misty Mountains; there he kept the Ring for over 500 years, and in that time the Ring changed him to look less like a hobbit. He often called the Ring his "precious". Gollum lost the One Ring, which was then found by Bilbo Baggins in "The Hobbit".
In the "The Lord of the Rings", it is told that after this Gollum left the Misty Mountains to search for the "thief Baggins" who had stolen his Ring. Sauron learned from Gollum that the One Ring was in the Shire and owned by a Baggins. Gollum was released by Sauron. Gollum then again went to search for his Ring. Gollum found the Fellowship in Moria and followed them. Frodo and Sam captured Gollum, and Gollum promised to lead them into Mordor. He later tried to trick them, leaving them with the spider Shelob. Gollum attacked Frodo on Mount Doom, and took back the Ring. But Gollum was careless and fell into the volcano, which killed him and destroyed the One Ring.
Beorn.
Beorn is a shape-shifter. He usually is like a big man, but he can change to become a bear. He lives between the Misty Mountains and Mirkwood. He helped at the "Battle of the Five Armies".
Nazgûl.
The Nazgûl, Ringwraiths or Úlairi are servants of Sauron. They were human kings and leaders in the Second Age. Sauron gave to them nine of the Rings of Power. With time they became like undead ghosts. They are invisible, but their eyes can sometimes be seen as a red light. They wear black cloaks, and usually ride black horses. Later in the "Lord of the Rings" they ride winged creatures called "fell beasts". When riding a fell beast they are also called "Winged Nazgûl".
Witch-king of Angmar.
The Witch-king of Angmar, also known as Lord of the Nazgûl or the Black Captain is the leader of the Nazgûl. He was the commander of Minas Morgul. He was killed in the "Battle of the Pelennor Fields" by Éowyn and Meriadoc Brandybuck.
Khamûl.
Khamûl is one of the Ringwraiths, and the only Ringwraith whose name is given by Tolkien. He was called the Black Easterling, and was the commander of the fortress Dol Guldur.
Shelob.
Shelob is a giant spider-like creature. She appears in "The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers". Shelob stings Frodo Baggins, but is wounded by Samwise Gamgee.
Smaug.
Smaug is a dragon. He appears in "The Hobbit". Smaug attacked the Lonely Mountain, killed the dwarves living there, and took their treasure and home. Later in the book Smaug was killed by Bard.
