Michael Schumacher (born 3 January 1969 in Hürth, near Cologne) is a German Formula 1 driver. He has won seven world championship titles and has the most Grand Prix victories in the world. This champion, nicknamed "campionissimo" by Italian fans of Ferrari, is considered the most popular German personality in the world. Michael's younger brother Ralf is also a Formula 1 driver. When he was small, his father gave him a little kart. It had a small motor bike engine in it. He started getting interest from that time.
1991.
He made his debut (first race) in the Belgian Grand Prix on 25 August(a date). He impressed(to make people happy) many fans(people who like him) as he qualified 7th on a track(place where he drives) where he had never previously(before) driven with an inferior(shit) car. At the start be burnt the clutch(a part of a car) and retired.
He was quickly snapped up by Benneton(a team(a group of people working together)) and finished in 5th place at the Italian Grand Prix.
He followed it up with 6th in both Portugal(a country) and at the then new Circuit de Catalunya in Spain(another country). He then crashed out in Japan(another country) and spun in the torrential(very hard) rain(water) at the season finale(last race of year(365 days)) in Australia(another country). In the 6 races he entered, he scored 4 points and 14th in the championship.
1992.
He started(began) the season(year) off well(good) with 4th in South Africa(another country) followed by his maiden(first) podium(top 3) finish in 3rd at the Mexican Grand Prix. He followed it up with another 3rd place in Brazil(another country) and 2nd in Spain(another country). In San Marino(another country) he crashed out, then came 4th in Monaco(another country) and 2nd in Canada(another country). He spun off in the rain(water) at the French Grand Prix and finished 4th in Britain(another country) and 3rd in Germany(another country). He retired again in Hungary(another country) but at Spa Francorchamps, where he made his debut, he won a rain(water)-affected race. He came 3rd in Italy, 7th in Portugal(another country), retired in Japan(another country) and came 2nd in Australia(another country). He finished the season in 3rd place overall (in front of Senna) with a total of 53 points.
Video.
, cries remembering Ayrton Senna
