Motley's Crew is a comic strip that had few but very devoted followers. The comic strip featured a factory worker named Mike, a stay-at-home grandmother named Mabel, their son Truman and daughter-in-law Tacoma, in-laws Abel and Buffy, and a whole lot of humor. There was a lot of comedy that involved the human body that was similar to "The Simpsons". In one of the later comic strips, Mike Motley becamesthe receiving end of a joke when his brother- and sister-in-law saw him emerge from his house wearing a previously worn three-piece tuxedo with a piece of his white jockey-style briefs sticking from out from his formal pants. At a marriage ceremony, Mike forgot to wear a necktie and his wife told him to wear a necktie the next time he attended a marriage ceremony.
In some comic strips, Mike Motley wore boxer shorts. In other comic strips, he wore briefs. This was not meant to be an error. It just meant that Mike Motley wore boxer shorts as outer clothes while inside his house and briefs as his underwear.
Rarity of the Comic Strip.
Unless a person collects newspapers as a hobby, "Motley's Crew" comic strips are rare to come by as no archive books have ever been made of this classic comic strip. A person looking for a single comic strip can copy a older local newspaper from a place that has old newspapers, pay a moderate price to have it copied and made bigger, and one must be careful to keep it away from small children who might not understand the full value of the strip (and think that it came from today's newspaper). This comic strip was commonly printed in the English language because the comic strip was created in the United States of America. It is possible for the comic strip to be translated into different languages including French, Spanish, German, and possibly Japanese. However, these comics strips would be much harder to find than their English equivalents.
Abel and Buffy.
"Abel and Buffy", whose last names are unknown, are minor characters on the comic strip "Motley's Crew". They provided the role for laughs when Mike Motley is forced by his wife into a funny situation. In one of the comic strips that took place between July 15 and July 31, 1997, Abel can be noticed wearing a normal business suit and Buffy is seen wearing a summer dress as their embarrassed brother-in-law Mike Motley is seen wearing a three-piece tuxedo, looking foolish and elderly (part of it is because Mabel couldn't force her husband to wear anything else suitable for a visit by in-laws in the time alloted (there wasn't even time to tuck his briefs completely underneath his trousers that are worn for formal events).
No Retirement for Mike Motley.
The last comic strip was printed on December 31, 1999. This meant that Mike Motley never retired from his job and neither he, his family, nor the loyal readers of this comic strip got to see a retirement party.
