The Old World rats and mice (called Murinae) is a subfamily in the family Muridae. It has about 560 species. This subfamily is larger than all mammal families except the Cricetidae. It is also larger than all mammal orders except the bats and the remainder of the rodents.
Probably the best known genera are rats and mice.
Description.
The Murinae are native to Africa, Europe, Asia, and Australia. They are the only terrestrial placental mammals native to Australia. They have also been introduced to all continents except Antarctica. They are serious pest animals. This is particularly true in island communities where they have contributed to the endangerment and extinction of many native animals.
Two prominent murine human commensals have become vital laboratory animals. The Brown Rat and House Mouse are both used for medical tests. They are among a handful of animals where the full genome has been sequenced.
The murines have a distinctive molar pattern that involves three rows of cusps instead of two, the primitive pattern seen most frequently in muroid rodents.
Fossils.
The first known appearance of the Murinae in the fossil record is about 14 million years ago with the fossil genus "Antemus". "Antemus" is thought to come directly from "Potwarmus", which has a more primitive tooth pattern. Likewise, two genera, "Progonomys" and "Karnimata" are thought to derive directly from "Antemus". "Progonomys" is thought to be the ancestor of "Mus" and relatives, while "Karnimata" is thought to lead to "Rattus" and relatives. All of these fossils are found in the well-preserved and easily dated Siwalik fossil beds of Pakistan. The transition from "Potwarmus" to "Antemus" to "Progonomys" and "Karnimata" is considered an excellent example of anagenic evolution.
Taxonomy.
Most of the Murinae have been poorly studied. Some genera have been grouped, such as the hydromyine water rats, conilurine or pseudomyine Australian mice, or the phloeomyine Southeast Asian forms. No tribal level taxonomy has been attempted for the complete subfamily. It looks like genera from southeast Asian islands and Australia may be early offshoots compared to mainland forms. The vlei rats in the genera "Otomys" and "Parotomys" are often placed in a separate subfamily, Otomyinae. They have been shown to be closely related to African murines in spite of their uniqueness.
Three genera, "Uranomys", "Lophuromys", and "Acomys" were once considered to be murines- Later, it was discovered that they were more closely related to gerbils through molecular phylogenetics. They have been assigned a new subfamily status, Deomyinae.
