Mary I of England (February 18, 1516 – November 17, 1558), also known as Mary Tudor, was the queen of England. She was the daughter of Henry VIII and his first wife, Catherine of Aragon. She was known as "Bloody Mary" because she was a Roman Catholic and executed a number of Protestants. After her death her half-sister, Elizabeth became queen.
Childhood.
Although she was not the heir Henry VIII was looking for, she was beloved by her parents. But when she was about eleven, Henry decided to divorce Mary's mother, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Anne Boleyn. After Anne Boleyn had Elizabeth Mary had to become one of Elizabeth's servants. Then, after Anne Boleyn was executed by the King, Mary's half-sister suffered the same fate as Mary. A month later, Henry VIII was married to Jane Seymour, who became Queen Jane. She gave birth to Edward, Prince of Wales. Two weeks later, Queen Jane died. Mary lost a faithful friend and also her pride. She had signed the documents acknowledging her parents' marriage as invalid and herself an illegitimate daughter of Catherine and Henry. The rest of Mary's life with Henry VIII living saw through a quick succession of step-mothers. Henry VIII died soon after marrying his last wife, Catherine Parr. His will had declared that the young prince was to succeed him. If he left no legitimate heirs, his older half-sister, Mary, was to succeed. If Mary didn't produce legitimate heirs, then the Lady Elizabeth, Mary's half-sister was to inherit the throne. After Elizabeth and her heirs, would come Henry's sister Mary Tudor's side of the family.
Edward succeeded to the throne as King Edward VI of England and I of Ireland. When Edward began to show signs of a coughing disease, the courtiers begun to dread the day when the Catholic Princess Mary would become Queen. Edward himself did not want Mary to succeed him, he had always wanted Elizabeth to become Queen after him. Instead of passing the crown directly to the Lady Elizabeth, Edward went ahead with a plan devised by the Lord Protector, John Dudley, to bypass all his sisters and let his Protestant cousin Lady Jane Grey become Queen after he died. Unfortunately for this nine days queen, Mary Tudor was determined to get back her crown and rightful place as Queen of England. Mary executed Jane Grey and married Philip II of Spain. Elizabeth was imprisoned many times under the suspicion of the new Queen.
In her desperate wishes to have children and prevent the Protestant Elizabeth from ascending to the throne, the Catholic Queen suffered from two phantom pregnancies. In the end, the lady who had suffered so, would still not get her wish come true. Elizabeth finally succeeded to the throne, becoming the new Queen Elizabeth I of England.
Bloody Mary in folklore.
Over time children began to make a game called "Bloody Mary". They said you must light 3 candles, leave the water running, turn off the lights in the bathroom, spin around saying "Bloody Mary" or "I stole your baby Bloody Mary" 3 times and then look in the mirror. A number of terrible things could then happen to you. It is not known whether this game was actually about Mary Tudor. Other variations of the game are about a witch, Mary Worth, or a pregnant noble woman Elizabeth Bathory. A modern version has "Bloody Mary" being a victim in a car accident. All the games have the spinning and chanting.
