Match Game was a game show that ran from 1962-1999.
Contestant Competition.
First the challenging contestant would pick a question, A or B. Host Gene Rayburn would read it to the contestant. Then the contestant and the six celebrities would write their answer to the question on a piece of paper. Then after the contestant and the celebrities got done with their answer, Gene would ask for the contestant's answer. They would tell it to him. Then he would ask the celebrities for their answers. If the contestant's and a celebrity's answer are the same the contestant would get a point, and a green triangle would light up.
Then the defending contestant would take the remaining question. Then the process was the same as above, except red circles lit up.
Whoever had the most points at after two rounds of the above procedures would win $100 and go on to Super Big Money Matchup.
Audience match.
Before the game show, the audience would be surveyed. Their top 3 answers to the question (e.g. Road ___) would be worth (3rd most popular) $100, (2nd most popular) $250, and (most popular) $500. The contestant would pick 3 celebrities to give them answers they thought would be under the $500 slot. Then the contestant would choose one of those answers or make up their own. The answers were revealed one at a time.
Head-to-Head match.
If the contestant won the Audience match, they would get a chance to win 10 times that money. They had to match a celebrity's answer exactly to questions like ____ Bee.
Other versions.
The first Match Game had different rules from this one and was shown on the NBC network starting in 1962 and ending in 1969. Then, this Match Game was introduced on the CBS network in 1973, and is the most famous version of Match Game. It ended in 1982, but in 1983, it was combined with another game show, "Hollywood Squares", to form the "Match Game-Hollywood Squares Hour", which was on television for one year. Six years later, in 1990, it was brought back for the ABC network with a new host, Ross Shafer. This version ended in 1991, but in 1998 it returned with Michael Burger as host. This version was not very famous, however, and ended in 1999.
