Medina IPA:/mɛˈdiːnə/ (Arabic:المدينة المنور IPA:ælmæˈdiːnæl muˈnɑwːɑrɑ or المدينة IPA:ælmæˈdiːnæ; also transliterated into English as Madīnah; officially al Madīnat al Munawwarah) is a city in the Hejaz region of western Saudi Arabia. It is the capital of Al Madinah Province. It is the second holiest city in Islam, and the burial place of its prophet, Muhammad.
Overview.
Medina currently has a population of more than 1,300,000 people (2006). The city was originally known as "Yathrib", but later its name was changed to Madīnat al-Nabī (مدينة ﺍﻟﻨﺒﻲ "city of the prophet") or "Al Madīnah al Munawwarah" ("the enlightened city" or "the radiant city"). The short form "Madīnah" simply means "city". Madina is the second holiest city of Islam, after Mecca (Makkah).
Medina's religious significance in Islam.
Medina is very important to muslims. This is because the prohpet Muhammad is buried in a mosque known as 'Masjid-e-Nabawi' or 'The Mosque of The Prophet'. The Mosque was built on a site next to Muhammad's home. Muslims believe that Prophets must be buried at the very same place that they die. Accordingly, Muhammad was buried in his house. The tomb later became part of the mosque when it was expanded by the Umayyad Caliph Al-Walid I. The first mosque of Islam is also located in Medina. It is known as "Masjid Quba," (the Quba Mosque).
Like Mecca, the city of Medina only permits Muslims to enter. The "haram" (area closed to non-Muslims) of Medina is much smaller than that of Mecca, though. Many facilities on the outskirts of Medina are open to non-Muslims. In Mecca the area closed to non-Muslims extends well beyond the limits of the built-up area. Both cities' numerous mosques are the destination for large numbers of Muslims on their annual pilgrimage. Hundreds of thousands of Muslims come to Medina each year to visit the 'Tomb of Prophet' and to worship at mosques in a unified celebration. Muslims believe that praying once in the Mosque of the Prophet is equal to praying at least 1000 times in any other mosque.
