Munich International Airport (IATAcode "MUC") is an airport 28 km north east of the city Munich, Germany. It is mainly used by Lufthansa and the Star-Alliance, which Lufthansa is in. In 2005 28.62 Million passengers used the airport. After Frankfurt am Main Munich is the second most important airport in Germany. It is 8th largest in Europe. This is a list of airlines using Munich Airport.
History.
Munich Airport was opened in 1992. Before that the airport was in Riem. Building was started in 1980.
Because Frankfurt am Main was used too much, Lufthansa shortly afterwards started to use international Routes from Munich. The Airport was named after "Franz-Josef Strauss" a politician who was very interested in aeroplanes. People in Munich usually just call it "München Flughafen" or just "der Flughafen".
In 2003 the second terminal was opened, for Lufthansa and Star-Alliance only.
A third runway is planned, because there is much traffic on Munich Airport, but people who live near the airport don't want it.
Geography.
You can use the Munich S-Bahn lines S1 and S8 to go to the city. They both cost 8,80€ and take about forty minutes. Taxis to Munich cost 50€ and can get stuck in traffic-jams.
The cities near the airport are Erding and Freising. They can be reached by Bus (~3-4 €) or Taxi (~18€).
The Munich Airport center, short MAC is between the two terminals. It has many shops and restaurants.
There is a Kempinski Hotel near the Airport and a second Hotel is planned.
Terminals.
Munich Airport has two Terminals. Terminal 2 is the newer and larger one.
Terminal 1.
Terminal 1 is used by the non-Star Alliance airlines. The halls or areas are numbered A-F. It was opened on 17th May 1992 20 million passengers can use it every year. At the moment the terminal is being renovated, giving more room for shops and other things. The first halls have already been finished.
Hall F.
Hall F is a secure terminal used by Israeli airlines only.
Terminal 2.
Terminal 2 is used by all Star Alliance flights. It was opened on 29th June 2003 and nearly 20-25 million passengers can use it every year. Many passengers like the terminal because connections are easy and fast. The time needed for a connection inside the terminal is only 25 minutes, the airport and Lufthansa say.
Central area.
The central area is a shopping-mall that is in between the two terminals; the older part which belongs to terminal 1 is an indoor area. The newer part which was built as the same time as the 2nd terminal is a big outside area.
