Nick 2 (formerly Nick Too) is a commercial-free time shift service of Nickelodeon began on July 1, 1989. For DirecTV users Nick 2 may be Nick (East) (Channel 299) for the western side of the United States which will be 3 hours later, or Nick (West) (Channel 300) for the eastern side of the United States that will be 3 hours earlier. It is owned by MTV Networks, a division of Viacom. This channel shows what was on the channels Nickelodeon/Nick Jr./Nick at Nite three hours earlier than the normal feed of the channel. On Comcast, Cox Cable and Verizon FiOS, there is Nick 2. On Time Warner Cable and Cablevision there is no Nick 2. Nickelodeon and Disney Channel are the only basic cable channels to have time shift services in the United States.
The 1st ident.
The first Nick Too ident is created in 1989 when time-shift services launched and is quite different from all its Nick idents. It features a sailboat 2 over the blue sky animation and 5 steak lines through the word "Nick" in typewriter. The music is bell string and our announcer Ron Holland saying "This Is Nick Too, It's Your Choice".
The 2nd ident.
The Nick Too ident was revised in 1999 and is different from all its 90's Nick idents. It features 3-D circles appearing and disappearing various characters from Nicktoons shows, live-action programs, Nick Jr shows and Nick-at-Nite favorites before the eye in the sailboat 2 logo zooms out along with the text "Nick" spins in. Our music is jazzy, features the three-note "It's Your Choice" musical logo. Our announcer this time Kim Brown saying, "This Is Nick Too, It's Your Choice".
The 3rd ident.
The Nick Too ident was revised in 2000 is quite different from all its idents. It features a kaleidoscope effect along with Nicktoons characters jumping around and character scenes in a kaleidoscope before the sailboat 2 with the Nick logo are zooming in. The music is Simpsons kaleidoscope music and our same announcer saying, "This Is Nick Too, It's Your Choice".
The 4th ident.
The newest 2001 Nick Too ident is different from all its newest Nick idents. It features the new Nick Too logo in different colors and fonts along with the slogan "It's Your Choice" which use one word at a time. The music is the 1994 USA Network music and our announcer Jay London saying "Your Watching Nick Too, It's Your Choice".
The 5th ident.
The Nick 2 ident was revised in the fall of 2002 and is quite different from all its Nick idents. It features graphics from The People's Court along with clips from Nicktoons, Live-action shows, Nick Jr favorites and Nick-at-Nite shows. Our music is the 1998 Real TV theme and our announcer David Kaye saying "This Is Nick Too, It's Your Choice".
The 6th ident.
The new Nick 2 ident was revised in the summer of 2004 and is different from all its idents. It features new Nick 2 graphics and great Nick stars along with the four-note "You Got The Choice" musical logo. Our music is electronica and our announcer Diane Brown saying "This Is Nick 2, It's Your Choice".
