Nirvana was an American alternative rock band in the 1990s. They were one of the most successful and influential bands of that time. Since they formed they have sold over fifty million albums all over the world. They introduced a style of rock music known as grunge, which was highly influenced by 1980s alternative rock, 1970s punk, and heavy metal. Grunge became more commercially successful than the previous punk rock, as promoted to the world by Sub Pop Records. Nirvana greatly affected the style of other grunge bands like Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, and Alice in Chains. They split up after their lead singer Kurt Cobain killed himself in 1994 of a self-inflicted shotgun wound.
History.
Nirvana started in 1987 when their singer Kurt Cobain and the bassist Krist Novoselic met and decided to form a band. The band had several different drummers until they found Dave Grohl. They released their first studio album, "Bleach", in 1989.
Their second album, "Nevermind", released in 1991, was a massive success. Many people bought it and it had the top spot on many music charts. It featured the song "Smells Like Teen Spirit" which was also a very big hit. In February 1992 Kurt married rock singer Courtney Love. The band caused controversy in 1992 when they played a song called "Rape Me" on MTV. Many people found this offensive. Around this time Kurt also started taking a lot of illegal drugs, including heroin.
Nirvana released another album, "In Utero", in 1993 and went on tour in Europe. Many of the dates were cancelled because Cobain was drinking lots of alcohol and taking lots of drugs.
He was taken into a rehab center to get over his addictions but he ran away. Eventually, he was found dead in his home on Friday, April 8, 1994. It was decided that he committed suicide with a shotgun. The other band members were shocked by this, and Nirvana officially split up.
Nirvana has released more compilation albums than regular albums. See Nirvana's discography.
After the band.
Since Nirvana broke up, Dave Grohl has started a new band, Foo Fighters. Krist Novoselic became interested in politics and also kept making music. He was the bassist for Flipper, which Kurt Cobain was a fan ofbut recently left the band.
