Nobunari Oda is a figure skater from Japan. He won the 2005 World Junior Figure Skating Championships, becoming just the second Japanse man in history to win that competition, after Daisuke Takahashi.
Oda was originally coached by his mother. Later, he moved part-time to Barrie, Canada to train at the Mariposa School of Skating.
He turned senior for the 2005-2006 Olympic season. He won the bronze medal at his first event, Skate Canada International, and then beat reigning World bronze medalist Evan Lysacek at the NHK Trophy to win. Japan had only one spot to the Olympics and to Worlds due to the withdrawing of Takeshi Honda from the 2005 World Championships with injury and the subsequent bad performance of Takahashi. At the 2006-2007 Japanese Nationals, Oda was originally declared the winner. Hoewver, an error in the scoring software was discovered and Takahashi instead became the winner. Oda had performed four combination jumps and only three are allowed. But the software did not penalize him. The Japanese federation "split" the international assignments, giving Takahashi the Olympics and Oda Worlds. Oda went to the Four Continents Championships first, winning it, and then went to Worlds. Again, he performed an illegal fourth jump combination, which lost him the bronze medal. Oda is often compared to American Johnny Weir, who is also inconsistent on counting combination jumps.
In the 2006-2007 season, Oda again beat Lysacek on the Grand Prix, then went on to win the bronze medal at the Grand Prix Final. He won the silver again at Nationals. At Worlds in Tokyo, Oda choked, performing once again too many combinations, and placed 7th.
Oda was originally given two Grand Prix assignments for the 2007-2008 season. However, on July 26, 2007, Oda was arrested by the Osaka prefectural police for driving his moped under the influence of alcohol. Luckily, no one was hurt. Oda has apologized for his crime. Due to this incident, Oda was quickly removed from the cast of an upcoming ice show in Japan.
On August 2, 2007, the Japan Skating Federation announced that it had suspended Oda from national competition until the end of October and from international competition and exhibitions until the end of December, effectively withdrawing him from his two Grand Prix assignments while allowing him to compete at Nationals and try to earn a spot to the 2008 Worlds.
The federation has also sentenced Oda to perform community service. He has accepted the punishment meted out by the federation.
Oda was fined ¥100,000, which he immediately paid.
Oda is the 17th direct descendant of Oda Nobunaga, a famous daimyo during Japan's Sengoku period.
Oda is known as a graceful skater with good basics and edging. He has very soft knees, allowing him to have jump landings that appear to be effortless and flow perfectly. He has very good spins and is known for being able to get very high scores without perfroming a quadruple jump because he has such good skating skills. Still, Oda is known for "not being able to count", that is, doing too many combinations when it matters most, thereby wasting points, because the fourth combination doesn't count.
