Nomi Sunrider is a fictional character in the "Star Wars" universe. A Jedi Knight from the early days of the Old Republic – about 4,000 years prior to timeline of the films – Nomi is featured in the "Tales of the Jedi" series of novels. Her first appearance was in ', the second story arc in the series (encompassing "Tales of the Jedi" 3, 4, and 5). Her character was married to Andur Sunrider, and they had a daughter, Vima Sunrider.
Tales of the Jedi.
Nomi Sunrider first appeared in the Dark Horse Comics "Tales of the Jedi" series in 1994.
Knights of the Old Republic.
In ', Nomi's husband was murdered by agents of Bogga the Hutt while on a trip to deliver Adegan crystals (used in making lightsabers). Guided by his spirit, she used his lightsaber to kill his attackers and to defend their child. Nomi was devastated by his death. She took the gems to her husband's Jedi Master, Master Thon of Ambria, who then decided to train her. Ultimately Nomi became a great Jedi.
The Freedon Nadd Uprising.
In ', Nomi retrained herself in the use of a lightsaber, even though she had promised never to use a lightsaber after her husband's death. She was trained by Master Thon and fell in love with Ulic Qel-Droma while traveling with him on several adventures. Ulic planned to sneak into the dark side of the Force in order to seek revenge for his master, Arca Jeth, who had been killed during an attack of Krath battle droids during a meeting of the Jedi Council; Nomi became concerned with his plan. Before Ulic left for Cinnagar as a smuggler, the two kissed for what would be the last time.
Dark Lords of the Sith.
In ', Nomi went to Cinnagar, along with Ulic's brother Cay and Tott Doneeta, to contact Ulic. Before arriving, Ulic was poisoned with Sith chemicals by Satal Keto, who was suspicious of the Jedi's newfound loyalty to Aleema. Ulic ordered Nomi to be captured, in order to tell her what he thought would be secret, that he planned to continue being a double agent. Satal caught this communication and ordered her and Ulic to death.
The Sith War.
In ', Nomi escaped from prison with help from Cay and Tott, while Ulic, blinded by his hatred and need to avenge his master's death, would not leave. After Nomi discovered that Ulic was apprenticed to Exar Kun during the The Sith War, she arranged to be part of the expedition of Jedi that was ordered to bring Ulic to stand trial before the Galactic Senate for his crimes. Nomi and Cay tried but failed to bring Ulic back to the light side. In a heated duel on Ossus, Ulic killed Cay; in her horror, Nomi used an old Force power to cut Ulic off from the Force completely. The dark side's hold on Ulic finally broken, he betrayed the Sith and helped the Jedi win the war.
Redemption.
In ', Nomi began a career in politics as a councilor, leader, and representative among the Jedi on Coruscant. Nomi's daughter, Vima, ran away to find Ulic after clashing with her mother, who, due to her busy career, did not spend much time training her. At first Ulic refused Vima's plea to train her, for she was a constant reminder of Nomi. After being trapped together in a blizzard, Vima told Ulic that she believed that Ulic was still the Jedi and the man Nomi loved. He then reluctantly agreed to teach her, despite being cut off from the Force. At the end of her training, she was a great Jedi, while he had learned to appreciate life once more. A fierce warrior who treated lightsabers with fear and respect, she became one of the greatest Jedi Masters in history.
After realizing her daughter was gone, Nomi found her on Rhen Var. Discovering a statue of Arca Jeth and her husband, she realized that Ulic had finally found peace. Ulic was shot in the back soonafter by a pilot, Hoggan (who hoped to become a hero for killing one of the Sith), and died cradled in Nomi's arms. He asked Nomi for forgiveness, to which she replied that she had already forgiven him. He gave Vima a ring-necklace that shone with light in the darkness as his final act before death. When Ulic's body vanished, Nomi declared that though he was cut off from the Force, Ulic had finally become a Jedi Master. After Ulic's death, Nomi resolved to spend more time with her daughter, training her.
Other works.
Nomi Sunrider would also be mentioned in the later graphic novels ', ', ', "Dark Empire II", "Dark Apprentice", "I, Jedi", and '. She appeared in hologram form in "Firestorm" - Star Wars Adventure Journal 15".
Family.
Nomi's descendant, Vima Da Boda, is a supporting character in the "Dark Empire" series.
