The Nintendo DS is the third newest handheld game system from Nintendo. Their newest handheld game system is the Nintendo DS Lite, a smaller version of the DS. The DS is a small, nearly pocket-size fold-up machine that lets people play video games. The games for the Nintendo DS are stored on small cartridges called "carts", which are kind of like memory card chips from digital cameras. They are small and may be easy to lose. However, they are quite sturdy, even if they are dropped. New games, such as Super Mario 64 DS, came out on the release date, and come free with the blue DS in North America.
The games' graphics are a little better than on the Nintendo 64. For most of Nintendo's systems, there have been no load times (except for the GameCube). With the DS, a level in the game loads up quickly, just like the Game Boy systems. This is because memory cards can be read a lot faster than CDs or DVDs.
The DS also has many new features. It has a new surround sound system. It not only works with games designed for the DS, but also for games designed for the Game Boy Advance. But the DS cannot play the oldest Game Boy games, or Game Boy Color games. It also features a touchscreen, a screen that, when touched with the included stylus, will cause something to happen in the game (like a PDA). There are two styluses with it, but more can be bought if they get lost.
Competiton.
The Nintendo DS is a rival competitor with Sony's PlayStation Portable. However, both Nintendo and Sony said that their products were aimed at different people, so there is "technically" no competition. At this time, the DS is enjoying good sales and has sold more units than the PSP has.
DS Lite.
In addition, Nintendo also developed and released a similar version of the DS. Known as the "DS Lite", it was first released on March 2 2006 in Japan, and June 11 2006 in the US.
The DS Lite plays the same games. It is smaller and lighter in size and weight and also has brighter screens. The console is so small that the Game Boy Advance games stick out when the player puts it into Slot 2. It also features a little cover so players can cover Slot 2 when it is not in use. The DS Lite is also sold in white, black, pink, blue, red, and silver.
Games.
Some games for the DS/DS lite are: Nintendogs, Mario Kart, Brain Age, Cooking Mama and.
Accessories.
There are many accessories for the Nintendo DS, including different coloured styluses and protective cases. Most consoles come with a screen protector and a car adaptor that charges the battery with a car's cigarette lighter.
