Norway is a country in the north of Europe. It is a part of the Scandinavian peninsula.
The mainland of Norway is surrounded by a coast and borders with Russia, Finland,and Sweden.
The coast touches the Oslo Fjord, Skagerrak, and the North Sea.
The Kingdom of Norway has been independent since 1905. Its head of state is now King Harald V.
The national day is May 17, which celebrates Norway's constitution of 1814. The parliament is called "Stortinget" and its members are elected by the people every 4 years.
About 4.6 million people live in Norway.
The capital, is the city of Oslo. It is also the largest city, with a population of over 530,000. Other major cities are Bergen with 230,000 people and Trondheim with 150,000; both have been the Norwegian capital in earlier years.
Norwegian is the national language. There are two official written versions of Norwegian called "bokmål" and "nynorsk". Many Sami individuals, are native speakers, of one of the Sami languages. ("Nord-samisk" is also an official language in a number of "kommuner". (Each "kommune" has a mayor.)
History.
King Harald is the first king born in Norway in over 600 years. He has two children; Princess Märtha Louise and Crown Prince Haakon Magnus.
In World War I Norway was neutral and served as a trading nation. Norway tried to stay neutral in World War II, but was occupied by German forces from 9 April 1940 to 8 May 1945. Even though it is a country it is special
Ministry of Defence.
The Government has Norwegian soldiers working in Afghanistan, together with soldiers from other countries that belong to Nato.
Economy.
oil, hydroelectric power, and fish.
Other natural resources are agriculture, forests, and minerals.
The Government collects much money from various sources, and has policies intended to spread this wealth among Norwegians. This spread of wealth, is done both directly and indirectly.
Ethnicity.
A native population of Norway, the Sami people, previously lived mainly in the northern parts of the country.
Many Sami individuals, now, do not live in areas that are considered to be Sami.
Tourism.
Among tourists to Norway, more come from Germany than from any other country. The Norwegian and German languages are related.
Media.
The largest newspapers in Norway are BT Bergens Tidende, VG Verdens Gang, Aftenposten and Dagbladet.
Norway has no national newspaper. The 3 last newspapers are Oslo-based.
Famous people born in Norway.
See: Norwegian people
Languages.
Not all Sami individuals, can speak any of the Sami languages.
