North Korea, or the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, is a country in the northern part of Korea. North Korea borders China, Russia, and South Korea. The capital city of North Korea is Pyŏngyang.
After World War II, Korea became independent of Japan and was occupied by the Soviet Union and the United States. They left Korea in 1948. North Korea was formed with Soviet support. North Korea became a socialist country, and still is. America decided to split the nation to stop communism from spreading to the South, so South Korea was formed with American support.
In 1950, North Korea sent troops to South Korea, trying re-unite Korea and Korean families under Communism. This began the Korean War. American troops led by Douglas MacArthur and troops from many other countries were sent in by the United Nations because the United States wanted to stop the communist political system from spreading. They forced the North Koreans almost as far as the border with China on the Yalu River. Because of this, China sent its troops to help the North Koreans. Both sides agreed to stop the war and leave the border between the two countries close to where it was before the war began.
Kim Il-Sŏng was the first leader of North Korea. He was the founder of "Juche" ("self-reliance"). In 1994, he died and his son, Kim Jŏng-Il took over. Kim Jŏng-Il is the current leader of North Korea.
North Korea is a socialist country. Its idea of human rights and freedom of speech are different from how other countries see them. Travelling to other countries, and moving around inside North Korea has been limited. Because of the "Juche" idea, North Korea still fears US domination. In certain parts of the country, the supply of food is not enough. Currently, foreign countries provide food for some of North Korea's population. That is called "foreign aid".
The people of this country do not have basic human rights as Westerners understand them, nor freedom of speech. They also do not have the right to travel to other countries due to the Juche idea that keeps North Korea in fear of foreign domination. Many North Korean people also do not have enough food. This is because America makes rules to stop countries giving North Korea food.
In October 2006, North Korea said that it had tested a nuclear weapon. Although the government says that the test was not dangerous, many other countries and the UN, became very angry because of this.
