Nudity means nakedness. When talking about people, nudity means that the people talked about are not wearing any clothes.
Nudity can also mean that a person is wearing less clothing that other people would expect. In this regard, nudity is related to culture. Cultures talk about modesty. A given culture uses modesty to express how people should behave and what people should wear, in a given situation. A person wearing less clothing than expected will sometimes be called "nude", in that context.
Nudity can also talk about how a person feels. People that do not wear things they usually wear, such as jewellery, wigs or makeup may feel "naked", or "exposed". They also may feel ashamed because they wear less things than is usual for them.
When talking about an animal, other than people, nudity means that the animal does not have hair or fur.
Levels of nudity.
There are different levels of nudity. Societies have different moral values for these levels. One such level in English is called "full frontal nudity". This usually is a pose where the nude person faces the viewer. In this pose, there are no things covering parts of the body. Many societies see this as very bad. The image below called "Truth" shows this pose.
Most movies try not to show this type of nudity. This is often done by putting an object somewhere. This object will hide the pubic area of the naked actor or actress. This kind of nudity can also be seen in the picture "Woman Bathing" above.
What societies think about nudity.
Different societies have different opinions about nudity. They may have rules or laws about what they think is nudity, and where they allow it. For example, in some societies, a woman can sunbathe topless on a beach. In the same society, it would be wrong if a woman went shopping topless.
Many religions also say what people should wear. In Christianity, women should cover their shoulders, and sometimes their hair, when they enter a Christian church.
In humans, nakedness is often connected with the feeling of shame. The amount of clothing needed to remove that feeling is different for each cultures. With certain indigenous peoples in the rainforest, like the Yanomami, a piece of string is enough to make that feeling go away. There are other indigenous people who will not feel shame, even if they are totally naked.
The Burqa is the opposite of this. The Burqa is a garment for women. It is used mainly in Arabic countries. It fully covers the woman. It has only a slit for her eyes to see.
Even with people from the same culture, different people can have different opinions on nudity. American people may feel wrong even when their underwear can be seen. They may cover their underwear with a garment when at a doctor's visit. On the other hand, other Americans think not is wrong with showing their underwear.
Central and northern Europe have more liberal views.
Countries in Southern Europe, where the Catholic Church is very important, as well as English-speaking countries which have been affected by Puritanism usually have a lower tolerance towards nudity in public. Countries in Central Europe, and Scandinavia care less about public nudity. The singer Janet Jackson was the cause of a scandal during the Super Bowl in 2004. She was performing during the half-time break, when her robe moved. Her left breast could be seen for a few seconds. Today, this is known as the "Wardrobe Malfunction" or "Nipplegate" by the media, the latter being a comparison to the Watergate scandal.
The Royal Academy of Arts runs some museums in London, and elsewhere. In 2008, they did an advertisement so that more people would visit their museums. In this advertisement, they showed a picture of a naked woman. This painting was done by Lucas Cranach the Elder in the 15th century. It is called "Venus" (shown below). The picture was printed on ads in the London Underground. It caused protests in London. Because of the protests, Transport for London refused to allow the ads to be used in the Underground. On December 7, 2008, the Internet Watch Foundation put the Wikipedia article on Virgin Killer, on their blacklist. This meant that most Internet users in Great Britain could no longer access the article. The foundation did this because they believed the original album cover could be child pornography. The cover is pictured on the Wikipedia article. It shows a naked 10 year old girl in a sexual pose, with her breasts shown.
Africa.
There are different traditions about nudity in Africa. Some of Africa south of the Sahara (called "sub-Saharan Africa") is similar to how they were after Colonialism. In certain Togolese tribal areas, it is common for big families to not wear any clothes at all for certain festivities. Others do not wear any clothes below the waist. This makes it possible for young men to see women and girls whom they may marry. Stick-fighting tournaments are very popular places to do this.
Other people, like the Bantu do not like public nudity at all. At a time, a newspaper in Botswana printed a photograph showing how a thief was punished. He was flogged on his bare buttocks. Many people did not like this. The problem was not the flogging, but the newspaper showing the picture.
The Ugandan Kavirondo tribes are a mix of Bantu and Nilotic immigrants. Traditionally, they went mostly naked. Over time, the men began wearing clothing similar to men in western culture.
Functional nudity.
Functional nudity is being nude for a reason. An example of this it to change from a wet swimsuit to a dry one. Even where nudity is generally not allowed, functional nudity is often allowed. Often a towel is used to lessen the effect this may have on other people.
Breastfeeding may sometimes involve partial nudity. However it is often not seen to be indecent by courts.
Sex segregation.
Very often, (functional) nudity in front of people of the same sex is less of a problem than being nude in a group of people of both sexes, or in a group where there are only people of the other sex. For this reason, places where this can happen, for example toilets or changing rooms are usually separated by gender. There is one for men, and another one for women. Functional nudity in front of people of the same sex is still considered a bad thing in some cultures. In Japan, for example, it is not allowed to have "open" urinals in men's toilets, nor "open" showers in change rooms. On the other hand, mixed-gender public saunas are normally acceptable.
Toplessness.
Toplessness is a word that means that women do not cover their breasts. In Europe, women can usually do this on the beach or near it. In the United States and Asia, this is often a crime.
Naturism.
"Naturism" (or "nudism") is a cultural and political movement. Followers of this movement think that nudity should get a higher value, both in the private as well as the public context. It is also a lifestyle based on personal, family and/or social nudity.
Naturists reject current standards of modesty. These discourage people from being naked alone, in the family or at social occasions, they say. They want to create a social environment where people feel comfortable in the company of nude people, and do not fear being seen nude, either just by other nudists, or also by the general public.
Nudity in art.
Since the very early ages, nudity has been a subject of the arts. One of the earliest works of art known is the Venus of Willendorf. It is a statuette (a small statue) of a nude woman. The face of the woman is not visible. The belly of the woman as well as her breasts are exaggerated. It is not known what the statuette meant to the people who made it, or what importance it had. From the Renaissance onward, nude figures were shown in works of art more often. Michelangelo is one of the Renaissance artists known for doing this.
Nudity in photography.
Since the beginning of photography, people have taken photographs of nude people. Some people simply photographed nude people. Some of the photographs were made to sexually arouse people. These are generally called pornography. Some people also photographed nude people because they thought the human body was something beautiful to show. These photos are usually not sexual in nature, and are known as nude photography. The kind of photography that is in between is called erotic photography.
Old Testament and Judaism.
The creation myth in the Old Testament of the Bible mentions nudity as a sign of innocence. Only after Adam and Eve have eaten from the tree of knowledge do they become aware of their nudity, and start to feel ashamed. Theologians see this feeling of shame as a consequence of the fall from grace. Because of this, they are later chased away from the Garden of Eden. The Bible does not make a distinction between shame as a consequence of not obeying a rule, and the shame resulting from nudity.
The Old Testament often sees nudity as a consequence of being poor or of being a social outcast. It is not seen as a result of breaking rules, and accepted. Later Orthodox Judaism sees nakedness as a bad thing.
Ancient Greece.
In Ancient Greece, especially Ancient Athens, people did not see a problem with nude men. Nude women were seen as bad, though, and women were forbidden from being nude in public. The Cynics taught that it was bad to have worldly goods. Feelings like shame were also seen as bad. There was nothing wrong with being naked.
The Gymnasion shows by its name alone that public nudity was not common in Ancient Greece. The name comes form "gynós", which means "naked". The gymnasion was used for sports. In Ancient Greece most sports were done totally naked. In most places in Ancient Greece, women were forbidden from doing sports, or from attending sports events.
The only place were women were allowed to do sports was Sparta. There, they also did sports, like the men, but separated from these. They were also naked while doing sports.
Another place where nakedness was tolerated was in the arts.
Ancient Rome, Celts, German tribes.
In Ancient Rome, nudity was nothing special or unusual. It was seen more as a sign of not needing much. People did not attach sexual feelings to it. When the Romans had conquered Ancient Greece, they did not think it was necessary to discuss or forbid that the Olympic Games were done in the nude. Cato the Elder mentions that usually the virtuous Roman worked nude during the summer months.
The Celtic and Germanic tribes bathed nude in rivers and lakes together and that sometimes children grew up nude. Romans also tell us that some of them fought the Romans in the nude.
Jainism and Hinduism.
Both Jainism and Hinduism have special monks. In Jainism these are called Digambars (or Digambarras), in Hinduism they are called Sadhus. Both lead an ascetic lifestyle, and are well-respected in their community. Part of this lifestyle is that they wear little or no clothes.
Nudity and sexuality.
Many cultures that expect some level of modesty associate nudity with sexuality. These cultures usually know striptease in some form. When the difference between the sexes is shown in the main stream media of these cultures this is often seen as sexually related. In Latin cultures the common definition of modesty does not generally allow genital nudity, but the definition of what is lewd has changed and women's breasts are now commonly exposed or depicted without scandal.
Nudity in front of a sexual partner is widely accepted, but there may be restrictions — for example, only at the time and place of sex, or with subdued lighting, during bathing with the partner or afterwards, covered by a sheet or blanket, or while sleeping.
Nudity in sports.
In Ancient Greece it was seen as normal that the athletes taking part in sporting events, like the Olympic Games were nude, for most events. At that time, women were not allowed to take part or in the games or watch them. Nudity with women was frowned upon.
Common activities in the nude.
At least since the early 20th century there is a movement of people wanting to do some things together, while they were nude. Sometimes it was just seen functionally, like a common bath in a pond or lake. Some people do other activities together (in the nude), where being naked is usually not required. For instance, some people prefer nude sunbathing when otherwise a Swimsuit could be worn. There are some nude bicycle tours. This movement is generally known as naturism or nudism.
Nudity and health.
The Naturism movement of the 20th century claims that being nude is healthy. Starting in 1853, reformer Arnold Rikli said that "Sun- and airbathing" is a good thing, and that it can only give its full potential when done in the nude. Many of these views have been proved wrong today. Not smoking or drinking alcohol is good for health, regardless of whether clothing is worn or not. People suffering from being exposed too little to the sun will also be so if they are clothed. Wearing wet clothes can lead to cystitis (an infection of the urinary bladder).
Some doctors recommend sleeping in comfortable clothes, or sleeping naked. At some points in time, fashion dictates very tight-fitting clothes. These can be bad for health.
Nudity as a form of protest.
Some people use the nudity as a form of protest, like a movement in the United States that wants equal treatment of bare-chested men, and women. This movement fights for the right of women to be topless. Often this is done with topless demonstrations.
One example that nudity was used as a form of protest, even in the Middle Ages is the story of Lady Godiva. She is said to have ridden through Coventry totally naked, only covered by her long hair. She did this to protest against the hight taxes.
Nudity for commercial reasons.
Nudity is often used to draw the attention of customers to a given product. That way, nude people or people with very little clothing are often shown on covers of magazines, even if the content of the magazine has nothing to do with nudity. Naked people, sometimes in connection with body painting are used to distribute fliers at events.
This uses erotic stimuli, especially to people of the opposite sex. On the other hand, nudity seems to work all by itself in such contexts. Nudity in public places is rare, and people generally do not expect it. The more it is used however, the less it will act on people. At some point it will have become normal.
Nudity and children.
Most children do not develop a feeling of shame until they are about 5 years old. For this reason there have been discussions. These can be split in roughly two groups: whether it is okay for children to see adults nude, and whether it is okay for children to see each other nude.
Different people have different opinions on the subject.
Nude children.
During different stages of their developement, the works of art have shown nude children or nude children together with nude adults. In recent years, showing nude children has become more and more problematic, especially with photographs. In a few cases, photographs taken by parents showing their toddler or small child naked have been seen as child pornography by courts. In May 2008, police in Sydney, Australia, raided an exhibition by the photographer Bill Henson featuring images of naked children on allegations of child pornography. Incidents such as this one sent a strong message to the community.
Children seeing their parents nude.
People cannot agree if parents should appear naked in front of their children. Gordon and Schroeder say that there is a wide variation on parental nudity from family to family. According to them, "there is nothing (..) wrong with bathing with children or otherwise appearing naked in front of them". In their opinion, doing so may provide an opportunity for parents to give important information. They note that by ages 5 to 6 children begin to develop a sense of modesty, and recommend to parents who wish to be sensitive to their children's wishes that they limit such activities from that age onwards.
Bonner recommends against nudity in the home where children are showing sexual behaviour considered problematic.
A study by Alfred Kinsey found that 75% of the participants stated that there was never nudity in the home when they were growing up, 5% of them said that there was "seldom" nudity in the home, 3% said "often", and 17% said that it was "usual". The study found that there was no significant difference between what was reported by men and by women with respect to frequency of nudity in the home.
In a 1995 review of the literature, Paul Okami concluded that there was no reliable evidence linking exposure to parental nudity to any negative effect. Three years later, his team finished an 18-year longitudinal study that showed that, if anything, such exposure was associated with slight beneficial effects, particularly for boys.
Children seeing other people nude.
Different cultures have different opinions on whether children should see people other than their parents, and other children naked. In general the opinions are also different, depending on how old the child is, and what context the nudity is placed in.
Many countries have made laws that should protect children from seeing sex scenes by accident. That way, such scenes may usually not be shown during the day. British TV must not show such scenes between 5.30am and 9pm. This is called "watershed". The Broadcasting Code requires that "Nudity before the watershed must be justified by the context."
Children showering together.
Sometimes the nudity of children in front of other children has been an issue. In Europe, it is common that all students take a shower together after sports classes. Usually showering is segregated by sex.
In the United States and some of English-speaking Canada, students at tax funded schools have historically been required to shower with classmates of the same sex after physical education classes. In the United States, public objections and the threat of lawsuits have resulted in a number of school districts in recent years changing policy to make showers optional. A court case in the State of Colorado noted that students have a reduced expectation of personal privacy in regards to "communal undress" while showering after physical education classes.. According to an interview with a middle school principal, most objections to school showers that he had heard were actually from the student's parents rather than from the student.
Nudity as a punishment.
Most people feel uneasy or ashamed when they are nude (outside a social context where this is acceptable). This fact has been used both as a means of torture and as a punishment. That way, during witch-hunts, the alleged witches were stripped to discover what was called the witches' mark. It was believed that the devil left this mark as part of the pact the witch had with him. When the mark was found, this was then used as evidence in the trials.
Nakedness can also be part of a punishment or a public humiliation. Torture manuals sometimes make a difference, as men and women react differently when they are disrobed.
The United States and its allies invaded Iraq in 2003. After they had done this, members of the United States Army Reserve abused prisoners. Photographs were circulated that showed that prisoners had to pose naked, were sometimes bound by ropes, and intimidated that way.
