There were two sets of Nuremberg Trials.
The first, and most well known, were the trials of the leaders of Nazi Germany. This was organized by the International Military Tribunal (IMT). The judges and prosecuters were from the four wartime allies, France, the USSR, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The second set of trials were the 12 "follow up trials" (). These trial were of groups lower ranking Nazis, like doctors, and officials of the German Foreign Office. Although the follow up trials were held in the same court-room as the IMT trials, they were run by the Americans alone.
The original plan was for the IMT to hold several trials, and the allies to hold their own trials of local officials as well. Cooperation between the Soviet Union and the Western Allies quickly broke down. The IMT only held the one big trial. So the US held trials of the next most important Nazis themselves.
The main trial.
The International Military Tribunal was opened on October 18 1945, in the Supreme Court Building in Berlin. The first session was presided over by the Soviet judge, Nikitchenko. The prosecution brought charges against 24 major war criminals and six criminal organizations - the leadership of the Nazi Party, the Schutzstaffel (SS) and Sicherheitsdienst (SD), the Gestapo, the Sturmabteilung (SA) and the High Command of the German armed forces (OKW).
"I" indicted      "G" indicted and found guilty      "O" Not Charged
"I" indicted      "G" indicted and found guilty      "O" Not Charged
The death sentences were carried out on 16 October 1946 by hanging using the inefficient American "standard" drop method instead of the long drop. The executioner was John C. Woods. The French judges suggested the use of a firing squad for the military condemned, as is standard for military courts-martial, but this was opposed by Biddle and the Soviet judges. They said that the military officers acted so badly they did not deserve to be treated as soldiers. The prisoners sentenced to jail were transferred to Spandau Prison in 1947.
The definition of what constitutes a war crime is described by the Nuremberg Principles, a document which was created as a result of the trial. The medical experiments conducted by German doctors and prosecuted in the so-called Doctors' Trial led to the creation of the Nuremberg Code to control future trials involving human subjects.
