Naruto (written ナルト in Japanese) is a anime (Japanese animated series) made by Masashi Kishimoto. It was also made into an manga (Japanese comic book|comic). The main character is called Naruto Uzumaki. He is a very loud ninja who wants to become "Hokage". The Hokage is the strongest ninja and the leader of Naruto's village, called Konoha (meaning "hidden leaf" in Japanese).
The manga was first published in 1999 in a Japanese magazine called "Shonen Jump". It was also translated into English. The anime was on TV for the first time on October 3, 2002. In the United States, it started on September 10, 2005.
Growth and popularity.
Naruto is a long manga. The story is not finished yet. It is the second most-popular shōnen (boy's manga). Since it began, a lot of Naruto fansites (websites made by people who like it a lot) were made with detailed information, guides and forums about the show. There is also a Naruto card game.
People like Naruto so much that they translate the anime in English before the English version comes on television. This may be because the American version is 146 episodes behind the Japanese one. There are more than 300 Japanese episodes of Naruto.
Anime.
The anime was released after the manga, but it quickly caught up because an anime episode is likely to be around 2 to 3 manga chapters. To stop the anime from catching up with the manga, "filler" episodes are created. Filler episodes are not part of the manga storyline. They are just there to make people wait until there are enough manga chapters to make new episodes based on the manga. For example, in Naruto, after episode 135, the anime was catching up with the manga. They made "filler" episodes that ended in early 2007.
The anime usually remains true to the manga but some scenes were changed to make it less violent. Some scenes that were added to anime that were not in the manga.
There are also four Naruto movies: "Naruto the Movie: Ninja Clash in the Land of Snow", "Naruto the movie 2:The Great Clash! The Phantom Ruins in the Depths of the Earth" and "Naruto the Movie 3: The Animal Riot of Crescent Moon Island", "Naruto: Shippūden the Movie 4
Plot.
Twelve years before the rest of the series, a giant nine-tailed fox attacked Konoha (Naruto's village). To save the village, the fourth Hokage (deceased) (leader of Konoha) sealed the fox's spirit inside a baby named Naruto Uzumaki. The Fourth Hokage had to die,but he was thought of as a hero in the village. He wanted people to think that Naruto was a hero, too. Sadly, most people thought of Naruto as the nine-tailed fox and hated him. The people that knew that Naruto was the demon could not tell anyone, but it did not stop them from being mean with Naruto. The people's children did not know about his secret, but they still hated Naruto because their parents hated him.
