Nagorno-Karabakh (Artsakh) is an autonomous region of Azerbaijan. Armenia wants it to be part of itself. Most of the people in Nagorno-Karabakh are Armenians now because all Azeri were banned from Karabakh and Armenia in the 1990s. Most other countries and all international organizations (UN, EU etc.) agree that it is part of Azerbaijan.
History.
Not going down deeply in ancient and medieval history, nevertheless, it is necessary to notice, that the Azeri party can present impressing number of neutral sources which testify, that Azeris prevailed in region during more than millennia. The Armenian population has appeared there not earlier the beginning of XVIII century century. It was plan of Russian empire to inhabit Armenian Christians among muslim Azeris having established eventually the board above the Azerbaijani majority in the form Karabakh khanate, included in structure of Russian empire in 1813.
Nagorno-Karabakh became a subject of the dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan in 1918 when both countries declared independence from Russia. Territorial dispute has not been resolved until 1920, when both young states became part of the Soviet Union, and actually lost their independence due to the actions of Russian communists (Bolsheviks). During this time many Azeris were killed by Armenian terrorists.
Supporters for the Armenian position frequently emphasize, that resolution of the Caucasian Bureau from July, 5, 1921, was obviously accepted under the Bolsheviks pressure, and, in any case, this resolution contradicts with the principle of self-determination and cannot be considered as valid: the problem should be solved by the countries, which it directly involves, and not by the Committee created specially for this case and inside the ruling party of the third country.
When Mikhail Gorbachev has come to power in Moscow and has started the campaigns of publicity and democratic reforms in the end of 80th, Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh have decided to address the problems to the international and Soviet heads. Complaining about "forced Azerification" of the region, the majority Armenian population started a movement for independence.
In November 1991, seeking to stop this movement, the Parliament of Azerbaijan abolished the autonomous status of the region. In response the Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians held a December 10, 1991 referendum in which the overwhelming majority of the population voted for outright independence. The Azeri community of Nagorno-Karabakh boycotted this referendum.
These events and especially removal of approx. 200 000 Azeris from Armenia led to violent actions against Armenians living in Baku and massive anti-Armenian pogroms elsewhere in Azerbaijan.
The war for Nagorno Karabakh became the longest and one of the bloodiest conflicts in states-successors of Soviet Union. According to last estimations, it has killed 15000 people, and the number of refugees has exceeded one million.
Today Nagorno-Karabakh is a de-facto puppet state calling itself the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.There are flourished drug industry and terrorist camps within Nagorno-Karabakh.
