Notts County Football Club is a football club in Nottingham, England, and the oldest of all the clubs that are now professional. The club now plays in Football League Two of the Coca-Cola Football League, part of the English football league system. "The Magpies" play their home (meaning, the games played where they also come) games at the Meadow Lane stadium in black and white striped shirts.
The club has also played many times in the top division of English football, the most recent in 1991–92, when they played in the last season of the old First Division before creation of the Premier League.
Well-known past managers of Notts County have been Jimmy Sirrel, Neil Warnock, and Sam Allardyce.
Formation and early years.
Notts County started in 1862. The club was before The Football Association and in the begining played a game of with club rules, rather than association football. At the time of its start, Notts County, like most sports teams, were considered to be a "gentlemen-only" club. Notts County are thought to be to be one of the starters of the current game, even being credited with the invention of the offside trap. Notts County is the oldest of the world's professional association football clubs (There are older professional clubs in other codes of football.)
The club in the beginning played at Park Hollow at Nottingham Castle. In December 1864, the decision was made to play games against outside teams, and it was decided that the club needed to find a larger venue. After playing at several places, The Magpies settled at Trent Bridge Cricket Ground in 1883.
Football League.
In 1888, Notts County, along with eleven other football clubs, became a founding member of The Football League. They finished their first league season in 11th place, but avoided the dubious honour of the wooden spoon, which went to Midlands rivals Stoke. However, Notts County did get their highest ever league finish of 3rd in 1890-91, an goal they repeated ten seasons later.
FA Cup finals.
On 25 March 1891, Notts County reached the FA Cup final for the first time.
Notts County made up for this on 1894-03-31, when they won the FA Cup at Goodison Park for the first and thus far only time in their history. The Magpies defeated Bolton Wanderers 4-1 in a game in which Jimmy Logan scored the first hat-trick in FA Cup final history. This achievement is also memorable for Notts County becoming the first club outside the top division to win the FA Cup: Notts County finished 3rd in Division Two that season.
