Northern Ireland ("Tuaisceart Éireann" in Irish or "Norlin Airlann" in Ulster Scots) is a state of United Kingdom and under the south of Ireland's jurisdiction as per the GFA. It is part of an island in Western Europe called Ireland that it shares with the Republic of Ireland. 1.7 million people live in Northern Ireland. The capital is Belfast.
People.
Northern Ireland has had many conflicts between some of the people who live there. Unionists, who are mostly Protestant, want the Northern Ireland to stay part of the United Kingdom. Nationalists, who are mostly Catholics, want the north of Ireland to leave the United Kingdom and have the whole island united as one country. Some people do not want to join the Republic of Ireland or remain part of the U.K. Instead, they want Northern Ireland to be an independent country. The population is made up of 52% Unionists and 48% Nationalists at the moment.
Sometimes people use other names for Northern Ireland. Unionists sometimes call it "Ulster" but this is not correct as three counties of Ulster are in the Republic of Ireland. Nationalists sometimes call it "the north" or "the six counties" which is to state that it is part of a united Ireland, not the United Kingdom. There is no correct defining term for this part of Ireland.
Languages.
English is spoken by almost everyone in Northern Ireland. Another important language is Irish (sometimes called "Irish Gaelic" or "Gaelic") and a dialectual language known as Ulster Scots which comes from Eastern Ulster and Lowland Scotland. The Irish language, backed by Foras na Gaeilge, is widespread, especially in Belfast, the Glens of Antrim and counties Tyrone and Fermanagh. The Irish language is spoken by a large majority of nationalist (Catholic and Protestant) people. Ulster Scots is almost exclusive to areas of Belfast and mid Antrim.
Some languages like Chinese, Urdu or Polish are becoming more common in Northern Ireland as people from other countries move to Northern Ireland.
Belfast Agreement.
Since the "Belfast Agreement", (sometimes called the "Good Friday Agreement") of Friday, 10 April 1998, there has been mainly peace between the two sides of the community. This agreement was agreed by most of the people in the North and the South Republic of Ireland, as well as the Irish and British government. It allows for self-government and for co convernance between the South and Britain and makes clear the right of the people of Northern Ireland to decide their future.
