Napoleon Bonaparte (French: Napoléon Bonaparte) (August 15, 1769 – May 5, 1821) was a general and Emperor of France.
Early life.
Napoleon was born Napoleone di Buonaparte in Ajaccio, Corsica to Carlo Buonaparte, a lawyer and politician, and his wife, Marie-Letizia Buonaparte. The Buonapartes were a wealthy family from the Corsican nobility. Napoleon changed his name so it sounded more French.
Early military career.
Napoleon was able to enter the military academy at Brienne in 1779. He moved to the Parisian École Royale Militaire in 1784 and graduated a year later as a second lieutenant of artillery.
Napoleon was able to spend much of the next eight years in Corsica. There he played an active part in political and military matters. Napoleon was promoted in the military.
The French Revolution caused much fighting and disorder in France. At times, Napoleon was connected to those in power. Other times, he was in jail. He helped the French Republic from those who supported the former king of France. He became a general in the French army. He led troops in Italy and he began to gain fame and power.
Napoleon married Josephine de Beauharnais on March 9, 1796.
In May 1798, Napoleon left for a campaign in Egypt and Syria. The French needed to threaten Britain's empire in India and the French Directory's concerns that Napoleon would take control of France. The Egyptian campaign was a military failure. Napoleon went back to France because of a change in the French government. Some believe that Napoleon should not have left his soldiers in Egypt. Napoleon helped lead the Brumaire coup of November 1799.
Defeat and exile.
In 1812, Napoleon went to war with Russia. They defeated many Russian cities and villages, but by the time they reached Moscow it was winter and his army did not have enough food. Napoleon's army was unable to defeat the Russians. The Russians began to attack. Napoleon and his army had to go back to France. Only 10,000 soldiers were able to fight at the end of the retreat.
On March 30, 1814, Paris surrendered. Napoleon gave up rule of France on April 11, 1814. He went into exile on the small island of Elba in the Mediterranean Sea.
The 100 Days.
Napoleon made a surprise return to France on March 1, 1815. His former troops joined him and he again became ruler of France for a length of 100 days. Napoleon was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo, which was his last battle. Napoleon was captured in Waterloo and taken to his second exile on the island of Saint Helena.
Pop Culture.
On September 27, 2008 legendary American football color commentator Dan Dierdorf, winner of the 2008 Pro Football Hall of Fame’s Pete Rozelle Radio-Television Award, stated "If Mike Shanahan was Napoleon, then this [Arrowhead] is his Waterloo" during the Denver Broncos 19-33 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs in which Broncos head coach, Mike Shanahan's, career record at Arrowhead stadium dropped to 3-11.
Second exile and death.
Napoleon was sent to the island of Saint Helena off the coast of Africa. He died on May 5 1821, of stomach cancer.
