A noun is a kind of word (see part of speech) that is usually the name of a person, place, thing, quality, or idea. In English, nouns can be singular or plural or they can be 1st (first) 2nd (second) or 3rd (third) person. The first person is the person speaking. The second person is the person spoken to and the third person is the person spoken about.
Nouns often need a word called an article or determiner (like "the" or "that"). These words usually don't go with other kinds of words like verbs or adverbs. (For example, people don't say "I will the go to school" because "go" is a verb.) Adjectives can also describe nouns. In English, there are more nouns than any other kind of word.
Every language in the world has nouns, but they are not always used in the same ways. They also can have different properties in different languages. For example, in some other languages, nouns do not change for singular and plural, and sometimes there is no word for "the".
Some examples of nouns in English are: "time, people, way, year, government, day, world, life, work, part, number, house, system, company, end, party, information".
The history of the word "noun".
The word 'noun' comes from the Latin "nomen" meaning "name." Words like nouns were described in early days by the Sanskrit grammarian Pāṇini and ancient Greeks like Dionysios Thrax.
Uses of nouns.
In English sentences, nouns can be used as a subject, object, or complement. They often come after prepositions, as the 'object of preposition'.
Nouns can sometimes describe other nouns (such as a soccer ball). When they do this, they are called modifiers.
There are also verb forms that can be used in the same way as nouns (such as 'I like "running".) These are called "verbals" or "verbal nouns", and include "participles" (which can also be adjectives) and "infinitives".
Kinds of nouns.
Nouns are grouped into common nouns, and proper nouns. There are also pronouns. These have commonly been considered a different part of speech from nouns, but in the past some grammars have included them as nouns as do many modern linguists.
Proper nouns.
A proper noun (also called proper name) is a name given to individual people, places, companies, or brands. Some examples of proper nouns are: "London, John, God, October, Mozart, Saturday, Coke, Mr. Brown, Atlantic Ocean"
Proper nouns begin with an upper case (capital) letter in English and many other languages that use the Roman alphabet. (However, in German, all nouns begin with an upper case letter.) The word "I" is really a pronoun, although it is capitalized in English, like a proper noun.
Some common nouns (see below) can also be used as proper nouns. For example, someone might be named 'Tiger Smith' -- even though he is not a tiger or a smith.
Number and countability.
In English and many other languages, nouns have 'number'. But some nouns are only singular (such as "furniture, physics") and others are only plural (such as "clothes, police"). Also, some nouns are 'countable' (they can be counted, for example, "one piece, two pieces") but others are not (for example, we don't say "one furniture, two furnitures").
How adjectives become nouns.
All adjectives without exception can become nouns by placing the word the in front of the adjective. Example: Take the adjective 'beautiful', place the word the in front of it like this, 'the beautiful' and 'beautiful' is no longer an adejective; it is now a noun. Example: "The beautiful is worthy of admiration".
In the sentence, "The beautiful flower is on the table", the word 'beautiful' is an adjective because it describes the noun 'flower'.
Most adjectives become nouns by adding the suffix ness. Example: Take the adjective 'natural', add 'ness' to get 'naturalness', a noun. To see a list of 100 adjectives used in Basic English, click here
