An optical fiber is a thin string or fiber for taking light from one end to the other. It is usually made of glass or plastic. The study of optical fibers is called fiber optics, which is part of applied science and engineering.
Optical fibers are mainly used in telecommunications, but they are also used for lighting, sensors, and special cameras for seeing inside small spaces.
How it works.
An optical fiber is a long, thin strand of clear material. Its shape is usually similar to a cylinder. In the center, it has a "core". Around the core is a layer called the "cladding". The core and cladding are made of different kinds of glass or plastic, so that light travels slower in the core than it does in the cladding. If the light in the core hits the edge of the cladding at a shallow angle, it bounces off. Light can travel inside the core and bounce off of the cladding. No light escapes until it comes to the end of the fiber, unless the fiber is bent or stretched.
If the cladding of the fiber is scratched, it may break. A plastic coating called the "buffer" covers the cladding to protect it. Often, the buffered fiber is put inside an even tougher layer, called the "jacket". This makes it easy to use the fiber without breaking it.
Uses.
The main use of optical fiber is in long-distance communication (telecommunication). Since the light does not leak out of the fiber much as it travels, the light can go a long distance before the signal gets too weak. This is used to send telephone and internet signals between cities.
Fiber is sometimes used for shorter links too, such as to carry the sound signals between a compact disc player and a stereo receiver. The fibers used for these short links are often made of plastic. TOSLINK is the most common type of optical plug for stereos.
Optical fibers can be used as lasers. Special fibers are used for this, that change how they pass light through when there is a change around the fiber. Sensors like this can be used to detect changes in temperature, pressure, and other things. These sensors are useful because they are small and do not need any electricity at the place where the sensing happens.
These fibers are also used to carry light for humans to see. This is sometimes used for decoration, like fiber-optic Christmas trees. Sometimes it is used for lighting, when it is convenient to have the light bulb someplace other than where the light needs to be. This is sometimes used in signs and art for special effects.
A bundle of fibers can be used to make a device called an endoscope or a fiberscope. This is a long thin probe that can be put into a small hole, that will send an image of what is inside through the fiber to a camera. Endoscopes are used by doctors to see inside the human body, and are sometimes used by engineers to see inside tight spaces in machines.
Lasers can be made out of optical fiber too. These are called fiber lasers. They are very powerful, because the long thin fiber is easy to keep cool, and makes a good quality light beam.
