The Olympic Games is a sporting event that takes place in a different city every four years. It includes many of the best athletes from all over the world. The first modern Games were held in Athens in 1896. The Motto of the Olympic Games is "Citius, Altius, Fortius," which means, in English, "Faster, Higher, Stronger."
There are separate games for the summer and winter. The Summer Olympic Games has many sports, including athletics (track and field events such as sprint, marathon, and discus), swimming, gymnastics, cycling, boxing, soccer, weightlifting, wrestling, basketball, and many other sports. The Winter Olympic Games also have many sports, which include skiing, speed skating, luge, bobsled, figure skating, and ice hockey.
Athletes win medals made of gold, silver, and bronze for coming in first, second, and third place.
The most recent Summer Olympics were held in 2008 in Beijing, China; before that, they were held in Athens, Greece in the year 2004. The next ones will be held in London, Great Britain, in 2012.
The most recent Winter Olympics were held in 2006 in Torino, Italy; before that, they were held in Salt Lake City, United States, in 2002.
The next ones will be held in Vancouver, Canada in 2010.
The Olympic Rings.
The Olympic Rings became the symbol of the Olympic Games in 1913. The five rings represent the fact that countries from all five continents of the world take part in the games. Each ring is a different color, and at least one of the five colors (Blue, Yellow, Black, Green, and Red) can be found on the flag of every country in the world. The rings do not represent particular continents.
Opening ceremony.
In the opening ceremony, the stadium is opened. Special events happen like songs, performances, dances, etc. The Olympic theme song is played, written by John Williams. The torch is brought in after being carried around the world, from Olympia, where the original olympics were held. Doves are released. Then, every athlete from each country comes into the stadium in alphabetical order, except for Greece, which comes first in as they created the games, and the country where the games are held, which goes last.
