One Piece (ワンピース|Wanpīsu) is an Anime series created by Eiichiro Oda, and follows the Mugiwara Pirates, led by captain Monkey D. Luffy, on their adventures in Grand Line. The main theme is Monkey D. Luffy's dream to find the One Piece, a grand treasure that the King of the Pirates, Gold Roger left behind. One Piece seems to take place in a world with one continent, infinate islands, and a vast and large sea filled with monsters and treasure.
Monkey D. Luffy.
Monkey D. Luffy is the main character in One Piece. He is brave and comes from Fuschia Town. In his childhood Luffy ate a "Devil Fruit" that gives him the ability to stretch his body like rubber. The "Devil Fruit" Luffy ate is called "The Gum Gum Fruit". When Luffy was a boy he met a pirate named Shanks who gave him his favourite straw hat and told him to return it to him after he became a great pirate. (Japanese: Gomu Gomu No Mi).
Zoro.
Zoro was a former pirate hunter but turned pirate when he joined Luffy. When he was little he was the greatest warrior in his dojo, next to Kuina the teacher`s daughter, who was frustrated that girls weren`t able to become great swordsman. Zoro points out that it doesn't matter if your a boy or girl. They then make a promise to one another that one of them will be the greatest swordsman, or swordwoman, of all time. The very next day Kuina dies after falling down some stairs. Zoro then takes her sword so he can fulfill their dream.
Sanji.
Sanji is an good cook and a martial artist (who uses his feet only) that falls in love with almost every girl he sees. when sanji was nine he was an apprentice on a cruise ship.
Nami.
Nami is a thief that steals from pirates.
Usopp.
Usopp is a great sniper but a coward. His weapon is a slingshot.
Chopper.
Chopper is a half reindeer and a half human who is a great doctor.
Robin.
Robin, formerly member of the crime organisation Barouque Works, joins the crew after being saved by Luffy.
Franky.
Franky is a half human and half robot who can fix boats and ships.
