The "Odyssey" is, along with the "Iliad", one of the two major Greek epic poems traditionally said to be written by Homer. It is said to be written in Greece about 900 BC.
The poem is the story about Odysseus's ten-year-long voyage home to Ithaca after the Trojan War. (Most of the Trojan War is told in the "Iliad".) At the same time, his wife Penelope has to fight off a lot of men who want to marry her; and his son Telemachos searches for him.
The Cyclops.
On his journey home after the Trojan War, Odysseus lands on the island of the Cyclops Polyphemus. The Cyclopes were a race of rough, uncivilized one-eyed giants. Odysseus and his men come to the cave where the Cyclops Polyphemus lives and go inside at the sight of sheep, cheese and milk. But when Polyphemus comes back, he does not let them leave his cave by blocking the entrance with a boulder. Then he rips apart and eats some of Odysseus' men. Odysseus wants to use his sword to kill Polyphemus but he knows only the Cyclops is strong enough to move to boulder blocking the exit to the cave. Odysseus a cunning hero then thinks of a plan to get away. He tells Polyphemus that his name is "Nobody", and gives him wine to drink. Intoxicated, Polyphemus falls asleep. Odysseus and his men find a wooden pole (a big stick, which was used as a stake), heat it in the fire and poke it while red hot into Polyphemus' only eye, blinding him. When Polyphemus cries out in agony, the other Cyclopes on the island answer his cry. From outside his cave, they asked him who is killing him, and he said "Nobody is killing me." and so the other Cyclopes went away again. The next morning Polyphemus lets his sheep out of the cave, but touches their backs so no one of the men could ride out on them. But Odysseus and his men hold themselves on the underside of the sheep, and so they get out. When Odysseus was on his ship again, he called out to Polyphemus and told him his real name. Polyphemus was very angry and threw a giant rock at them, nearly hitting the ship. Then, as revenge, he prayed to his father Poseidon that Odysseus would never make it home to Ithaca and if he was fated to make it home, Odysseus would lose all of his men, his ship and find trouble at home. The latter prayer became the plot line of the Odyssey.
The Sirens.
Odysseus and his ship have to pass the Siren's island. The Sirens were always singing very beautifully, so sailors would try to go to them, but their ships would get destroyed, and they would die.
Odysseus tells his men to put wax in their ears, so they will not hear the song of the sirens. He also tells his men to bind him to the ship's mast, so he cannot go to the sirens when he hears their song. His men can then look at Odysseus and see when he cannot hear the sirens anymore, because he is calm again. Then they can take the wax out of their ears, and free Odysseus.
Calypso.
After escaping from the sea, and the death of his men, Odysseus comes to the island Ogygia. On this island lives the nymph Calypso, and Odysseus stayed with her for seven years. But then the god Hermes came and told her that the gods said that she had to let Odysseus go. Calypso promised Odysseus immortality (that he would live forever) if he stayed, but he wanted to go back to his wife Penelope. So Odysseus built a raft and left her.
The Phaeacians.
After a storm, Odysseus comes to the island of the Phaeacians. There he is found by the king's daughter Nausicaä. Nausicaä brings him to the palace of her father, King Alkinoos. During his time there, Odysseus tell the story of his journey. After this, Alkinoos gives Odysseus a ship and sends him home to Ithaca.
Return Home.
Odysseus finally returns to Ithaca, where he disguises himself as a beggar. He goes to his home and meets his son Telemachus. Together they kill the Suitors. Later the families of the Suitors come to kill Odysseus for revenge. But the goddess Athena makes them stop and give up the fight.
