Also known as, "a smell", an odor or odour is a volatilized chemical compound, generally at a very low concentration, which humans and other animals perceive by the sense of olfaction.
Odors are also called smells, which can refer to both pleasant and unpleasant odors. The terms fragrance, scent, or aroma are used primarily by the food and cosmetic industry to describe a pleasant odor, and is sometimes used to refer to perfumes. In contrast, stench, reek, and stink are used specifically to describe unpleasant odors.
Basics.
Odor is a sensation caused by molecules dissolved in air.
The widest range of odors consist of organic compounds although some inorganic substances, such as hydrogen sulfide and ammonia, are also odorants.
The perception of an odor effect is a two step process.
First, there is the physiological part; the sense of the stimulus by receptors in the nose.
After that the psychological part follows. The stimuli are processed by the region of the human brain which is responsible for smelling.
Because of this an objective and analytical measure of odor is impossible.
While odor feelings are very personal perceptions, individual reactions are related to gender, age, state of health and private affectations. Common odors that people are used to, such as their own body odor, are less noticeable to individuals than external or uncommon odors.
For most people, the process of smelling gives little information concerning the ingredients of a substance. It only offers information related to the emotional impact. However, experienced people, such as flavorists and perfumers can pick out individual chemicals in complex mixes through smell alone.
Odor analysis.
The concentrations of odorant in Germany are defined by the “Olfaktometrie” since the 1870’s. In this connection it’s about the standard method to define the sense barrier of odors on basis the thinner of concentrated odor loaded assays. Following parameters are defined: odor substance concentration, intensity of odor and hedonism assessment.
Pheromones.
Pheromones are odors that are deliberately used for communication. A female moth may release a pheromone that can entice a male moth that is several kilometers away. Honeybee queens constantly release pheromones that regulate the activity of the hive. Workers can release such smells to call other bees into an appropriate cavity when a swarm moves in or to "sound" an alarm when the hive is threatened.
In Mammals some pathway of Pheromones identification lay in vomeronasal organ and some - in odor receptors.
