"Oliver & Company" is an animated movie, released in the United States by Walt Disney Pictures and Buena Vista Pictures on November 18, 1988. It is loosely based on Charles Dickens's book "Oliver Twist", which has been made many times for the screen and television.
The Story.
Oliver is an orange orphan cat lost in New York City, when a mongrel (dog of mixed breed), named Dodger, finds him. When Oliver gets some sausages for him (from a hot dog seller named Louie), Dodger leaves the cat behind and runs to the barge of his poor owner, Fagin the pickpocketer. Inside Fagin's barge are four other dogs, which he also owns: Tito the chihuahua, Einstein the Great Dane, Rita the afghan hound, and the serious bulldog Francis. When Oliver breaks in, those dogs (including Dodger) go into a fit of fighting and confusion over their visitor. After Fagin breaks it up, he goes outside on a quay, only to find out that he must pay his agent, Sykes, some money within three days. In order to get the money, Fagin, his dogs, and Oliver set out into the city streets the next day. While the poor man is unlucky trying to sell his useless stuff, the animals encounter a limosine that is driven by Winston, a butler. They put on an act to get his attention. In the end, Tito gets "barbecued" after interfering with the limosine's dashboard, and Jennifer finds the cat, who is tangled up in the wires nearby. Taking Oliver home at Fifth Avenue, she makes friends with him. Thus, the cat is lucky to be adopted twice in two days. The next morning, Fagin's dogs return in order to get Oliver back to their barge, much to the upset of Winston and his pet poodle, Georgette. But as they do so, Oliver feels he cannot fit in with his other friends. Yet he is Fagin's best hope, because of the gold tag on his collar. So he writes to the "Very Rich Cat Owner" at Oliver's address in hopes of getting Sykes' money faster. As Jenny reads that letter after she comes home from school, she and Georgette go to the docks to get Oliver. Jenny gets him back, thanks to Fagin, but then Sykes kidnaps her for the sake of the ransom that the pickpocketer has to pay in twelve hours. It is up to Fagin and his dogs to save both Jenny and Oliver from the wrath of Sykes and his Dobermans, Roscoe and DeSoto.
