Port Vale Football Club are an English football club currently playing in Football League Two. They are based in Burslem, Staffordshire — one of six towns that make up the city of Stoke-on-Trent. The club's rivals in the city are Stoke City, games between the two clubs are known as the "Potteries derby". Games against Crewe Alexandra are also called a derby, although "Alex" are situated in south Cheshire.
Port Vale are not named after a place, which is unusual for an English league clubs. The two symbols on the clubs badge are a bottle kiln and the Stafford knot.
The Old Recreation Ground.
The Rec was Port Vale's home from 1913 to 1950. The Old Recreation Ground was located in Hanley and stood on what is now the car park for the Potteries Shopping Centre.
Vale Park.
Vale Park has been Port Vale's home ground since 1950. Vale Park has a capacity of around 22,000.
Vale Park is not the oldest ground in the world, it has had several upgrades in its history. The original ground consisted of two stands (The Railway side and the Lorne Street main stand) with banks of terracing at the Bycars and Hamil ends of the ground. Stands were added behind each set of goals during the 1980s and 1990s as the ground began to be made more modern. The paddock at the front of the Railway Stand was also made into an all-seated area, with just the Lorne Street side now being left as a standing area. Vale fans stood for the last time on Lorne Street at the end of the 1997-98 season, with the stand being demolished before work began on a new £3,000,000 structure. Work has yet to been finished on this, due to low funds and a change in ownership of the club. However, once new owners V2001 had taken care of the financing, work was finally begun on finishing the second half of the stand. It is due to be completed sometime in 2008.
Robbie Williams.
Among the club's famous fan base is singer Robbie Williams, who was raised in Stoke-on-Trent. He is now a major shareholder, having, in February 2006, bought £240,000 worth of the £250,000 worth of available shares in the club. Castle Comfort Stairlifts, the club's sponsors, at the same time bought the remainder for £10,000.
For the computer game FIFA 2000, he provided an original theme song with "It's Only Us", on the condition that Port Vale were included in the game, which they were, and are located in the Rest of World section. This song was also featured on the only FIFA Soundtrack CD release by EMI.
In 2005 Williams founded Los Angeles Vale F.C., a Super Metro League team in the United States, named for Port Vale and based at his L.A. home.
League.
Football League Division Three North: 2
Best Cup runs.
FA Cup
League Cup
