Physics is the science of matter and how matter interacts.
What is physics?
Physics is the study of matter and energy in space and time and how they are related to each other. Physicists assume (take as given) the existence of mass, length, time, electric charge and temperature and then define (give the meaning of) all other physical quantities in terms of these basic units. Mass, length, time, electric charge and temperature are never defined but the standard units used to measure them are always defined. In the International System of Units, the meter is the basic unit of length, the kilogram is the basic unit of mass, the second is the basic unit of time, the
coulomb is the basic unit of electric charge. Temperature may be expressed in degree Celsius, degree Fahrenheit, or in degree Kelvin. The International System of Units (abbreviated SI from the French Système International) is the world's most widely used system, both in everyday commerce and in science but the United States has not adopted it yet.
Physics studies how things move, and the forces that make them move. For example, velocity and acceleration are used by physics to show how things move. Also, physicists study the forces of gravity, electricity, magnetism and the forces that hold matter together.
Physics studies very large things, and very small things. For example, physics studies stars, planets and galaxies and other big pieces of matter. Physics also studies small pieces of matter, such as atoms and electrons.
Physics also studies sound, light and other waves. Physics studies energy, heat and radioactivity, and even space and time. Physics not only helps people understand how objects move, but how they change form, how they make noise, how hot or cold they will be, and what they are made of at the smallest level.
Physics uses numbers.
Physics is a quantitative science because it is based on numerical measurements. Mathematics is used in physics to make models and predictions of how nature behaves. The predictions are compared to the way the real world works. Physicists are always working to make their models of the world better.
General description.
Physics is the science of matter and how matter interacts. Physics is used to describe the physical universe around us, and to predict how it will behave.
Physics is the science concerned with the discovery and characterization of the universal laws which govern matter, movement and forces, and space and time, and other features of the natural world.
Breadth and goals of physics.
The sweep of physics is broad, from the tiniest components of matter and the forces that hold it together, to galaxies and even larger structures. There are only four forces that appear to operate over this entire range. However, even these four forces (gravity, electromagnetism, the weak force associated with radioactivity, and the strong force which holds atoms together) are believed to be different aspects of a single force.
Physics is primarily focused on the goal of formulating ever simpler, more general, and more accurate rules that govern the character and behavior of matter and space itself.
One of the major goals of physics is the formulation of theories of universal applicability. Therefore, physics can be viewed as the study of those universal laws which define, at the most fundamental level possible, the behavior of the physical universe.
Physics uses the scientific method.
Physics uses the scientific method. That is, data from experiments and observations are collected. Theories which attempt to explain these data are produced. Physics uses these theories to not only describe physical phenomena, but to model physical systems and predict how these physical systems will behave. Physicists then compare these predictions to observations or experimental evidence to show whether the theory is right or wrong.
The theories that are well supported by data and are especially simple and general are sometimes called scientific laws. Of course, all theories, including those known as laws, can be replaced by more accurate and more general laws, when a disagreement with data is found.
Physics is Quantitative.
Physics is more quantitative than most other sciences. That is, many of the observations in physics may be represented in the form of numerical measurements. Most of the theories in physics use mathematics to express their principles. Most of the predictions from these theories are numerical. This is because of the areas which physics has addressed are more amenable to quantitative approaches than other areas. Sciences also tend to become more quantitative with time as they become more highly developed, and physics is one of the older sciences.
Fields of physics.
Classical physics traditionally included the fields of mechanics, optics, electricity, magnetism, acoustics and thermodynamics. Modern physics is a term normally used to cover fields which rely on quantum theory, including quantum mechanics, atomic physics, nuclear physics, particle physics and condensed matter physics, as well as the more modern fields of general and special relativity. Although this distinction can be commonly found in older writings, it is of limited current significance as quantum effects are now understood to be of importance even in fields previously considered purely classical.
Approaches in physics.
There are many approaches to studying physics, and many different kinds of actitivies in physics. There are two main types of activities in physics; the collection of data and the development of theories.
The data in some subfields of physics is amenable to experiment. For example, condensed matter physics and nuclear physics benefit from the ability to perform experiments. Experimental physics focuses mainly on an empirical approach. Sometimes experiments are done to explore nature, and in other cases experiments are performed to produce data to compare with the predictions of theories.
Some other fields in physics like astrophysics and geophysics are primarily observational sciences because most their data has to be collected passively instead of through experimentation. Nevertheless, observational programs in these fields uses many of the same tools and technology that are used in the experimental subfields of physics.
Theoretical physics often uses quantitative approaches to develop the theories that attempt to explain the data. In this way, theoretical physics often relies heavily on tools from mathematics. Theoretical physics often can involve creating quantitative predictions of physical theories, and comparing these predictions quantitatively with data. Theoretical physics sometimes creates models of physical systems before data is available to test and validate these models.
These two main activities in physics, data collection and theory production and testing, draw on many different skills. This has led to a lot of specialization in physics, and the introduction, development and use of tools from other fields. For example, theoretical physicists apply mathematics and numerical analysis and statistics and probability and computers and computer software in their work. Experimental physicists develop instruments and techniques for collecting data, drawing on engineering and computer technology and many other fields of technology. Often the tools from these other areas are not quite appropriate for the needs of physics, and need to be adapted or more advanced versions have to be produced.
Physicists.
There are many famous physicists. Isaac Newton studied gravity. Galileo Galilei studied light and how planets move. Albert Einstein made a theory for how light can make electrons move, and studied how gravity affects light and space. Heinrich Hertz discovered that light is a type of electromagnetic wave.
Ernest Rutherford said that "Physics is the only real science. The rest are just stamp collecting."
