Palm trees are a family of plants. This family is called Arecaceae. Most of them are trees but some are shrubs. They grow in hot climates, but some have been planted as far north as Britain.
There are over two thousand kinds, living in many kinds of places from rainforests to deserts.
Palms are one of the most well-known and widely planted tree families. They have had an important role to humans throughout much of history. Many common products and foods come from palms, and they are also used a lot in parks and gardens in areas that do not have heavy frosts.
In historical times palms have been were symbols for such ideas as victory, peace, and fertility. Today, palms remain a popular symbol for the tropics and vacations.
Range.
Most palms live in the tropics. Palms are common throughout the tropical regions of the world, and are present in almost every part of the tropics. Some areas have more kinds than others; Madagascar has more kinds than the rest of Africa, but Colombia may have the highest number of kinds in one country.. There are common in the warmer climates of North America, Such as Jamaica, California, Texas, Florida and Cuba.
Only about 130 kinds of palm grow naturally outside the tropics. Most of these grow in the subtropics. The northernmost palm is the European fan palm, which reaches as far as southern France. The southernmost palm is the Nikau, which reaches the Chatham Islands near New Zealand..
Shapes and flowers.
Most palms are a straight, unbranched stem, but sometimes a branching stem, or even a creeping vine, such as the rattan.. They have large evergreen leaves that are either 'fan-leaved' or 'feather-leaved' and arranged in a spiral at the top of the trunk. The leaves have a tubular sheath at the base that usually splits open on one side when it is grown.. The flowers grow on an inflorescence, a special branch just for carrying the great number of tiny flowers. The flowers are generally small and white, and are star-shaped. The sepals and petals usually number three each. The fruit is usually a single seed surrounded by flesh. the familiar coconut is the seed of a large fruit.. Some kinds may contain two or more seeds in each fruit.
Where palms live.
Palms inhabit a wide range of habitats. Over two-thirds of palms live in tropical forests, where some species grow tall enough to form part of the canopy and other shorter palms form part of the understory. Some kinds form pure stands in areas with poor drainage or regular flooding. Other palms live on tropical mountains above 1000 meters, Palms may also live in grasslands and scrublands, usually where there is water, and in desert oases. A few palms are adapted to extremely basic lime soils, while others are similarly adapted to very acidic soils.
Unusual palms.
The Coco de mer has the largest seeds of any plant, 30-50 centimeters in diameter and weighing 15-30 kilograms each. Raffia palms, with leaves up to 25 meters long and 3 meters wide, have the largest leaves of any plant. The "Corypha" palms have the largest inflorescence (flowering part) of any plant, up to 7.5 meters tall and containing millions of small flowers. The wax palm, Colombia's national tree, is the tallest palm in the world, reaching heights of 70 meters.
Palm fossils.
Palms first appear in the fossil record around 80 million years ago, during the late Cretaceous Period. Some kinds from that period are still to be seen today, such as the nipa palm or mangrove palm.
Palms in danger.
Like many other plants, some palms are in danger of dying out because of human activity. The greatest dangers are from Increasingly large cities, mining, and turning forests into farmland. The harvesting of heart of palm for food also poses a threat, because it comes from the inner core of the tree, and harvesting it kills the tree. The use of rattan palms in furniture has caused a big fall in the number of rattan palms, as they are collected from the wild instead of being farmed.. The sale of wild seeds to growers and collectors is another threat.
At least a hundred kinds are in danger, and nine kinds are said to have recently died out..
It is very hard to save palm seeds because they are killed by cooling them, which is the normal way of keeping rare seeds for the future. Also, planting rare kinds in parks can never truly recreate the wild areas they come from, and the plants may not do well in these parks..
The Palm Specialist Group of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) started in 1984, supported by the WWF. The group gathered a lot of information from different parts of the world. An action plan to save rare palms was made by this group in 1996..
Date palms in history.
The early importance of palms in the Middle East is shown in scripture. They are mentioned more than 30 times in the Bible, and more than 22 times in the Koran.
Palms used for food and drink.
Apart from the well-known coconut and date, there are other kinds of food from palms. Palm oil, Sago, heart of palm and palm wine are all eaten or drunk in different parts of the world.
Use in War.
South Carolina is nicknamed the Palmetto State, after the sabal palmetto, logs from which were used to build the fort at Fort Moultrie. During the American Revolutionary War their spongy wood helped deflect the British cannonballs.
Other uses of palms.
Coir is a coarse, water-resistant fibre from the outer shell of coconuts. It is used in doormats, brushes, mattresses, and ropes. Dragon's blood is a resin used in dyes, varnishes and incense, can come from the fruit of the rattan. The betel nut is often chewed in eastern Asia as a mild drug. Some peoples living in palm-rich areas use palms to make many of their necessary items and food. Palm leaves are also valuable to some peoples as a material for thatching or clothing.
Today, palms are popular in parks and gardens in countries outside the tropics. two of the most cold-tolerant species are the Chusan palm, from eastern Asia, and the needle palm from the United States.
The palm as a symbol.
The palm branch was a symbol of triumph and victory in Roman times. The Romans rewarded champions of the games and celebrated success in war with palm branches.
Jews also had a tradition of carrying palm branches during festive times.
The motto of the University of Southern California is "Palmam qui meruit ferat", which means in Latin, "Let him bear the palm who has deserved it".
Palms appear on the flags and seals of several places where they are native, including those of Haiti, Guam, Florida and South Carolina.
In Religion.
The palm has many meanings in both ancient and modern Middle Eastern religions.
Christianity.
Early Christians used the palm branch to symbolize the victory of the faithful over enemies of the soul, as in the Palm Sunday festival celebrating the triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem.
In Christian art, martyrs were usually shown holding palms representing the victory of spirit over flesh, and it was widely believed that a picture of a palm on a tomb meant that a martyr was buried there. Origen calls the palm "the symbol of victory in that war waged by the spirit against the flesh. In this sense it was especially applicable to martyrs, the victors par excellence over the spiritual foes of mankind; hence the frequent occurrence in the Acts of the martyrs of such expressions as "he received the palm of martyrdom."
In other faiths.
In Judaism, the palm represents peace and plenty. The palm may also symbolize the Tree of Life in Kabbalah.
Prophet Muhammad is said to have built his home out of palm, and the palm represents rest and hospitality in many cultures of the Middle East.
Palm stems represented long life to the Ancient Egyptians, and the god Huh was often shown holding a palm stem in one or both hands.
The sacred tree of the Assyrians was a palm that represents the god Ishtar connecting heaven, the crown of the tree, and earth, the base of the trunk. The Mesopotamian goddess Inanna, who had a part in the sacred marriage ritual, was thought of as the one who made the dates abundant.
The palm tree was a sacred sign of Apollo in Ancient Greece because he had been born under one.
Modern times.
Today, the palm, especially the Coconut, remains a symbol of the stereotypical tropical island paradise.
The palm tree is also used for the stereotypical view of an Oasis.
