General Yahya Khan, the new Chief Martial Law Administrator, was known for the speed with which he disposed of whatever reached his desk. He came to deal with the problems accumulated by his predecessor ever more perfunctorily and with apparent lack of forethought. Within 32 months he had imperiously led his country to humiliating military defeat and the dismemberment before it had completed it first quarter century of existence.
He had adopted the Ayub formula of populist authoritarianism - making concessions to labour and broadening the base of primary education. He sacked several hundred officials on grounds of corruption. At the same time he freely used martial law regulations to suppress dissent. Constitutionally, Yahya's populism went further than that of his predecessor. Ayub had conceded a form of parliamentary government and direct election of assemblies on the basis of adult franchise. Yahya now demolished the system of parity in parliament between the two parts of the country. Henchforth West Pakistan would cease to be one unit: it would revert to its pre-1955 provincial structure. He accepted the formation of a constituent assembly to draw up a new constitution, and promised to transfer power to whoever won the general election. The only caveat to the revival of democratic rule was that the new constituent assembly, to be elected in 1970, produce a new constitution within a short time. It could be that Yahya's advisers banked upon the emergence of numerous small factions in the National Assembly so that the Chief Martial Law Administrator/President could retain his poistion not only as the head of state but also as the final arbiter in all key matters.
This- in December 1970- was to be Pakistan's first general election in 22 yrs of independence. The people were seized by enthusiasm at their first ever opportunity to vote on national issues. In the Eastern Wing, voters were carried away by the prospect of autonomy, and in the Western Wing by the vision of an egallitarian levelling-up. The election itself was the culmination of the most frenzied political debate the country had witnessed. Turn out was heavy and polling free of interference. In the East, Sheikh Mujib's Awami League eclipsed all rivals, conceding them only two out of its share of 162 National Assembly seats. In the West, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party took a majority of the seats. After humouring Sheikh Mujib as the Premier-designate, Yahya curiously started negotiating the sharing of power. He played simulataneously on the Eastern Wing's suspicions as to his junta's commitment to relinquishing power and on Bhutto's rejection f Mujib's "Six Points" as a thinly disguised formula for secession. General Yahya allowed the perleys to drag on and failed to assess the consequences of putting off the assembly's inaugural session. Reaction in the Eastern Wing was ferocious, bringing extremists to the fore and compelling Mujib to match their militancy. Not unexpectedly the negotiations foundered and Yahya sent in troops the mission was called "Operation Searchlight" to put down Awami League-led agitation. Clumsy use of force against the civilian population and the removal of traitory Sheikh Mujib to West Pakistan to face charges carrying the death penalty pushed East Pakistan into a bloody civil war.
Republic of India saw the opportunity to intervene decisively in East Pakistan. It opened its doors to all those who sought refuge on its territory and helped them raise militias to fight the Pakistan Army. However, it was not until the Yahya regime had lost the goodwill of the major powers, with the exception of China, and New Delhi had negotiated a treaty with Moscow, India took its decision to attack Pakistan in what was still its Eastern Zone however both Israel and India recognized Bangla-Desh on the 17th April and 6th December 1971. Pakistani forces in East Pakistan had neither the strength nor the leadership to give an honourable account of themselves. In any case, Victory was probably impossible, and the plan to relieve pressure from India in the east with an offensive along the West Pakistan international border except for Kashmir failed to materialise.
The people of West Pakistan were outraged and shamed by the ignominy of surrender in Dacca, and poured out into the streets to vent their anger. General Yahya could not resist one last fling. A new constitution drafted by his insulated experts was issued which even the officially owned newspapers could not be persuaded to publish. The junta had no option but to summon Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto from New York, where he had gone on belated mission to shore up the country's diplomatic effort. They begged him to return and assume the leadership of the nation that remained. The brief Yahya interregnum is to be credited with the country's first free and fair election. Yet his memory is reviled for the break-up of Pakistan. To this day, surrender ceremony in DACCA on that fateful day in December 16th 1971 is recalled with shame and anger.
