Princess Daisy is a character from the Super Mario video games series. Princess Daisy is the second major female of the Mario series next to Princess Peach.
Appearances.
In her first appearance, Daisy had pale skin, long orange hair, and a white pattern on her dress. Her appearance in NES Open Tournament Golf is more or less the same, aside from her hair now being more of an auburn color. In later games, such as Mario Tennis and Mario Party 3, her appearance was refined, giving her a rounder face, a slightly darker skintone, and a daisy-motif for her accessories, with flower jewels appearing on her crown, earrings, and brooch. The daisy-motif has stuck ever since, though it should be noted that the daisy-motif was readily apparent in her concept art for Super Mario Land.
In Mario Party 4, Daisy's character design was altered yet again, giving her shorter hair, a new dress design, and once again a paler skin tone. Nowadays, Daisy no longer has a pale skin complexion, instead it is now more of a pink tone. Daisy and Peach also have consistently different gloves; while Peach's gloves end at around mid-triceps, Daisy's gloves end at the wrists. Daisy looks equal in height to Peach, though she may appear shorter in some games. In her early game depictions, Daisy wore a red crown, and during some of the Nintendo 64 games she wore a pink crown. Nowadays she wears a gold one, the same as Peach.
In most of her game appearances, Daisy has consistently worn a yellow and/or orange color scheme, usually in the form of a collared dress, with white and orange accents, meant to parallel that of Peach's pink-themed fashion just as Luigi's outfit does to Mario's.
In Mario sports titles, Daisy (and Peach) are the only two characters to always wear different outfits from their regular ones. She is usually depicted in orange shorts with a yellow shirt and daisy accessories. In Super Mario Strikers, Daisy wears a two-piece outfit. In Mario Hoops 3 on 3, Daisy normally appears in her usual sports outfit but has a second unlockable costume. In Mario Strikers Charged, she pretty much looks the same as in Super Mario Strikers, but she has cover herself up with armor plating along with other characters, leaving a quarter of her leg and her belly exposed.
Movies.
"Princess Daisy" appears as one of the main characters in the "Super Mario Bros. (film) Super Mario Bros. " In 1993 the movie was, played by Samantha Mathis.
Mario's younger brother Luigi (John Leguizamo) becomes infatuated with archaeologist Daisy. She is kidnapped by the Koopa Cousins, Iggy and Spike, and taken to the alternate dimension of Dinohattan, a land where dinosaurs evolved to become the dominant species. Dinohattan is ruled by Koopa (Dennis Hopper), who usurped Daisy's father by transforming him into a sentient fungus using a de-evolution gun. Daisy was in possession of a piece of meteorite that could be used to merge Dinohattan and Manhattan so Koopa could conquer the human world.
After the Mario Bros. defeat Koopa, Daisy stays behind in Dinohattan to help her restored father. The movie ends with Daisy showing up at Mario and Luigi's apartment to alert them that there is a problem, apparently setting up a never-made sequel.
