Punk rock (or "punk") music genre related to rock music. Punk rock is often described as harder, louder, and cruder than other rock music. Many punk rock songs have lyrics (words) which tell angry stories or which use rude or controversial words.
Punk is more than music.
Punk rock is a style of music. Many punk rock musicians and punk rock music listeners (called "punks") want to protest or rebel against the norms or rules of society. Punks say that people should "Do It Yourself", which means that people should try to accomplish their goals using the materials in their own communities. Many punk bands make their own music recordings and print their own CD covers, without using a major record company.
Many punks have strong political beliefs. Punk rock musicians are often mad at the government, the police, and laws. Many punk rock songs protest injustice, lies, and unfairness in countries. Almost all punks are leftists, who believe that a country should share the products and food that it produces with all the people in the country. Some punks are vegetarian or vegans, because they believe that animals should not be killed for food. Some punks are anarchists. A very small number of punks are conservative, libertarian, or Republican.
Many punk musicians put colored hair dye in their hair or put gel in their hair to make it stand up. They wear these clothes as a form of protest or rebellion against the norms or rules of society.
1970s.
Punk rock developed in Britain in 1976-1977. Punk rock bands like Buzzcocks, The Clash, The Damned, Generation X, The Jam, the Ramones, Sex Pistols and Patti Smith played loud, angry songs. Punk rock musicians often did bad things, such as saying rude words on television. Many newspapers wrote articles about the bad behavior of punk rock musicians.
1980s.
In the 1980s, a new type of punk rock called "hardcore punk" or "hardcore" developed. Punk rock music began being mixed with Heavy Metal rock music. Many hardcore bands began playing in the United States.
1990s.
In the 1990s, punk rock began being mixed with pop music to create a new lighter style of music called pop-punk. Pop-punk bands include Green Day and Good Charlotte. Some pop-punk bands mixed punk rock with ska music.
2000s.
Pop-punk was still popular in the 2000s. Some people who like the 1970s-style punk rock criticize pop-punk because pop-punk is commercialized.
