A pirate code is a code of conduct for pirates. Some of these codes are fictional, and some historical.
Historical articles of piracy.
In the second half of the 17th century, buccaneers started following rules. These rules had many different names, including Chasse-Partie, Charter Party, Custom of the Coast, or Jamaica Discipline. Eventually, they became known as Articles of Agreement, or the pirate's code. These changed from one captain to another. Sometimes they were different from one voyage (journey) to another. These rules included punishments for rule breakers and how much treasure each crew member would receive.
Each crew member signed the articles (or if they couldn't write, make a mark). After the rules were signed, they were then posted in a common place, often the door of the grand cabin.
There are three known sets of these rules that still exist today. Most of these come from Charles Johnson's "A General History of the Pyrates". Part of a code from Henry Morgan is written in Alexandre Exquemelin's book "The Buccaneers of America". Very few of these rules still exist today, because often pirates burned the papers before being caught. They did this to prevent these papers from being used against them.
Bartholomew Roberts' articles.
One of the most famous sets of pirate rules was written by the famous Welsh pirate Bartholomew Roberts in 1720.
I. Every man has a vote in affairs of moment; has equal title to the fresh provisions, or strong liquors, at any time seized, and may use them at pleasure, unless a scarcity (not an uncommon thing among them) makes it necessary, for the good of all, to vote a retrenchment.
"(This means that all crew members can vote on issues on the ship. All crew members can have any food or drink they have stolen, unless there is not much to go around.)"
II. Every man to be called fairly in turn, by list, on board of prizes because, (over and above their proper share) they were on these occasions allowed a shift of clothes: but if they defrauded the company to the value of a dollar in plate, jewels, or money, marooning was their punishment. If the robbery was only betwixt one another, they contented themselves with slitting the ears and nose of him that was guilty, and set him on shore, not in an uninhabited place, but somewhere, where he was sure to encounter hardships.
III. No person to game at cards or dice for money.
"(This means that crew members cannot gamble using money while playing cards or dice)"
IV. The lights and candles to be put out at eight o'clock at night: if any of the crew, after that hour still remained inclined for drinking, they were to do it on the open deck.
"(This means that all fires had to be put out by 8:00 PM. If crew members wanted to drink after 8:00 PM, then they had to do it on deck.)"
V. To keep their piece, pistols, and cutlass clean and fit for service.
"(This means that crew members' weapons had to be kept clean)"
VI. No boy or woman to be allowed amongst them. If any man were to be found seducing any of the latter sex, and carried her to sea, disguised, he was to suffer death;(so that when any fell into their hands, as it chanced in the Onslow, they put a sentinel immediately over her to prevent ill consequences from so dangerous an instrument of division and quarrel; but then here lies the roguery; they contend who shall be sentinel, which happens generally to one of the greatest bullies, who, to secure the lady's virtue, will let none lie with her but himself.)
"(This means that no young boys or women were allowed to be crew members. If a crew member took a woman out to sea in disguise, then he would be killed as punishment.)"
VII. To desert the ship or their quarters in battle, was punished with death or marooning.
"(This means that if a crew member ran away from battle, he would be killed or left on a deserted island.)"
VIII. No striking one another on board, but every man's quarrels to be ended on shore, at sword and pistol. (The quarter-master of the ship, when the parties will not come to any reconciliation, accompanies them on shore with what assistance he thinks proper, and turns the disputant back to back, at so many paces distance; at the word of command, they turn and fire immediately, (or else the piece is knocked out of their hands). If both miss, they come to their cutlasses, and then he is declared the victor who draws the first blood.)
"(This means that the crew members were not allowed to fight on the ship. If they had to fight, they would fight on shore with a sword and pistol. They were not allowed any help from other crew members in their fight.)"
IX. No man to talk of breaking up their way of living, till each had shared one thousand pounds. If in order to this, any man should lose a limb, or become a cripple in their service, he was to have eight hundred dollars, out of the public stock, and for lesser hurts, proportionately.
"(This means that no crew member was allowed to leave the ship's crew until each member had 1000 pounds' share of plunder. If a crew member became seriously injured, he would be given 800 dollars.)"
X. The captain and quartermaster to receive two shares of a prize: the master, boatswain, and gunner, one share and a half, and other officers one and quarter.
"(The captain and the quartermaster each receive two shares of stolen money or goods. The master, boatswain, and gunner each receive one and a half shares of stolen money or goods. Other officers receive one and one fourth shares of stolen money or goods.)"
XI. The musicians to have rest on the Sabbath Day, but the other six days and nights, none without special favour.
"(Musicians could not play music on the Sabbath Day.)"
