The penis is a male sex organ found on the outside of the body. It is used for urination (getting rid of liquid waste from the bladder) and for sexual reproduction. The main sexual function of the penis is to be inserted into a woman's vagina and deliver semen to cause pregnancy. This activity is called sexual intercourse.
Structure.
The human penis is made up of three types of tissue. It has two corpora cavernosa next to each other and a corpus spongiosum between them.
The end of the corpus spongiosum forms the glans penis, underneath the foreskin (in uncircumcised men), or exposed (in circumcised men). The area on the bottom of the penis, where the foreskin is attached, is called the frenum.
The urethra, the tube where urine and semen travel through, runs down the corpus spongiosum, and opens at the tip of the penis. Sperm are made in the testes and stored in the epididymis around the testes. During ejaculation, sperm are pushed up the vas deferens. Fluids are added by the seminal vesicles, the prostate gland and the bulbourethral glands to make semen.
Erection.
A penis can become erect if a man is sexually aroused. In an erection, the penis fills with blood. The blood makes the penis become longer, thicker and harder. Veins taking blood away from the penis get smaller, so less blood is taken through. Arteries bringing blood to the penis get wider, bringing more blood to the penis.
Ejaculation.
Ejaculation is pushing semen from the penis, and usually happens during an orgasm. Muscles push semen from the penis and into the vagina, possibly making the woman pregnant. During orgasm, semen moves through the urethra and comes out of the hole at the tip of the penis. Ejaculation may happen during sleep (called a 'wet dream').
Men can ejaculate during sexual intercourse or by masturbation. In masturbation, men can excite their own penis and other sensitive areas of their body, such as the scrotum, by rubbing the genital area. A man must have gone through puberty before he can ejaculate.
Penis size in humans.
The length and thickness of the penis is different for different man. The size of a soft penis (not erect) is much smaller than when it is erect. Some penises grow more when they get hard than other penises. In most cases, whether a penis is big or small, it can still be used for sex. It averages out to be around 3 to 6 inches long when not erect. The average size of an erect human penis is between 13 – 16 cm (5.1– 6 in). The average circumference of a penis is 12.3 cm (4.85 in) when fully erect.
The longest human penis was found by Doctor Robert L. Dickinson. It was 34.3 cm (13.5 inches) long and 15.9 cm (6.25 inches) around.
Circumcision.
The foreskin is a fold of skin that covers the end of the penis. Cutting off the foreskin is called circumcision. The foreskin is connected to the head of the penis. During circumcision, the foreskin is removed from the penis. Circumcision is usually performed on infant males for religious or cultural reasons.
Some men have the foreskin cut off when they are adults because they have problems with their foreskin. Some men have the foreskin cut off because they want to change how their penis looks.
In some religions, babies and young boys have their foreskin cut off. This is expected in Islam and Judaism. It is not required according to Christianity, but it is allowed and is quite common among some Christians. In the Jewish religion baby boys are required to have their foreskin removed. There is a small movement within the Jewish community to replace Bris Milahs (ritual circumcision) with "Bris Shaloms" or other non-invasive welcoming ceremonies.
