Puppets are objects used in theatrical performances. They usually use strings or other mechanisms to mock movement and to make the puppet look alive. Some puppets are very simple to make and use, whilst others are very complicated and require skill to use. Puppeteers are the operators of puppets and are usually concealed from the view of the audience. Some, however, are not. An example is a ventriloquist and dummy. There are many different types of puppets to be found around the world. Puppetry is a special art form that is very important in some cultures.
Types of puppets.
Finger Puppet: A very simple type of puppet where the puppet is placed on your finger and manipulated by moving your finger.
Pop-up puppets: A cone with a rod through and a puppet inside. When the rod is pushed up, the puppet appears.
Paddle Puppet: The puppet is on the end of a paddle. When the puppeteer steps on the paddles back end the other end lifts up, giving the impression that
Jumping Jack: A puppet where the arms and legs of the puppet are attached to a string. When the string is pulled down, the arms and legs go up.
Hand Puppet: Similar to a finger puppet, but only larger. The puppeteer uses his fingers and hand to manipulate the puppet.
Rod Puppet and Bunraku: The puppet is controlled with rods attached to the puppets arms and legs, whilst another puppeteer controls the head and possibly mouth. Bunraku is a special type of Japanese rod puppetry.
Shadow Puppet: Another very simple puppet. A cut out figure on a rod is held in front of a light. Its shadow is projected onto a screen. The puppeteer moves the puppet around, giving it a degree of life. Sometimes coloured paper is used to give a certain amount of colour to the puppet.
Marionette or String Puppet: A marionette puppet is moved around with strings that hang from above the theatre. This is one of the more complex types of puppetry and is hard to master as some marionettes can have up to thirty strings.
Ventriloquist Figure or Dummy: This puppet is one of the few where the audience sees the puppeteer. The puppeteer moves the puppets head arms and mouth with his hands as well as with levers. The performance usually takes the shape of a conversation between the dummy and the puppeteer. The puppeteer throws his voice, to make it seem as if the puppet is talking.
