Potassium permanganate is the chemical compound KMnO4. In this salt, manganese is in the +7 oxidation state. The salt is also known as "permanganate of potash" and "Condy's crystals". The permanganate ion is a strong oxidizing agent. It dissolves in water to give deep purple solutions, evaporation of which gives prismatic purple-black glistening crystals. It has a sweet taste and is odourless.
History.
In 1659 a German chemist, J.R. Glauber, fused a mixture of the mineral pyrolusite and potassium carbonate to obtain a material that, when dissolved in water, gave a green solution (sodium manganate) which slowly changed colour to violet (potassium permanganate) and then finally red. This report represents the first description of the production of potassium permanganate.
Just under 200 years later a Londoner named Henry Bollmann Condy trained as a chemist. He had an interest in disinfectants and marketed a number of products including "ozonised water". He found that when he fused pyrolusite with NaOH and dissolved the product in water it gave a solution that had good disinfectant properties. He patented this solution, and marketed it as "Condy's Fluid". The problem was that the solution, although it was quite effective, it was not very stable. This difficulty was overcome by using KOH rather than NaOH. This gave a more stable material, which had the added advantage of being easily converted to the equally effective potassium permanganate crystals. This crystalline material was known as "Condy’s crystals" or "Condy’s powder". Potassium permanganate was comparatively easy to manufacture so Condy was subsequently forced to spend considerable time in litigation in order to stop competitors from marketing products similar to "Condy's Fluid" or "Condy's Crystals".
Early photographers used it as a component of flash powder.
Chemical applications.
Potassium permanganate is used as an oxidizing agent in diverse chemical reactions in the laboratory and in industry. It also serves as a disinfectant and in deodorizers. It can be used as a reagent for the synthesis of many different kinds of chemical compounds. In wastewater treatment, it is used to neutralize hydrogen sulfide. In analytical chemistry, a standardized aqueous solution of KMnO4 is sometimes used as an oxidizing titrant for redox titrations due to its deep purple color. In a related way, it is used as a reagent to determine the Kappa number of wood pulp. Mixing potassium permanganate and formaldehyde forms a mild tear gas.
As an oxidant in organic synthesis.
Dilute solutions of KMnO4 convert alkenes into diols (glycols). This behaviour is also used as a qualitative test for the presence of double or triple bonds in a molecule, since the reaction decolorizes the permanganate solution; thus it is sometimes referred to as Baeyer's reagent.
Concentrated solutions oxidize a methyl group on an aromatic ring, e.g. toluene to benzoic acid.
KMnO4 oxidizes pseudoephedrine hydrochloride to produce methcathinone, a Schedule I drug in the United States. Consequently the DEA has restricted its use and sale by classifying it as a List I controlled precursor. Potassium permanganate is listed as a Table I precursor under the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.
Acids and Potassium Permanganate (KMnO4).
Concentrated sulfuric acid reacts with KMnO4 to give Mn2O7, which can be explosive.. Similarly concentrated HCl gives chlorine. The Mn-containing products from redox reactions depend on the pH. Acidic solutions of permanganate are reduced to the faintly pink Mn(H2O)6+2. In neutral solution, permanganate is only reduced by 3e- to give a brown precipitate of MnO2, wherein Mn is in a +4 oxidation state. This is the material that stains one's skin when handling KMnO4. KMnO4 spontaneously reduced in an alkaline solution to green-coloured K2MnO4, wherein manganese is in the +6 oxidation state.
A curious reaction is observed when one adds concentrated sulfuric acid to potassium permanganate. Although no reaction may be apparent, the vapor over the mixture will ignite paper impregnated with alcohol. Potassium permanganate and sulfuric acid react to produce some ozone, which has a high oxidising power and rapidly oxidises the alcohol, causing it to combust. "This reaction is explosive and dangerous, and may make a spray of acid." An approximate equation for the ozone formation is shown below.
Hazards.
Solid KMnO4 is a strong oxidizer and in general it should be kept separated from oxidisible substances. For more information consult an MSDS. Some reactions need a bit of a solvent, for example, powdered potassium permanganate + powdered sugar will ignite (but not explode) a few seconds after a drop of water is added. Dilute aqueous solutions of KMnO4 are not dangerous. KMnO4 forms dangerous products upon contact with concentrated acids.
Potassium permanganate stains the hand and clothing (as it is reduced to MnO2) and should be handled with care. Clothing stains may be washed away using acetic acid. Skin stains disappear within 48 hours.
