A professional wrestling promotion (also federation or fed) is a company or business that performs regular shows involving professional wrestling. 'Promotion' also describes a role which involves management, advertising and planing of running a wrestling event ("see promoter").
Currently, the major wrestling organizations in North America are World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE), the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA), and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) (all based in the United States), and the Mexican lucha libre promotions Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre and Asistencia Asesoría y Administración. There are federations all around Europe and in Japan, South America, Puerto Rico, Australia, New Zealand and the rest of the Caribbean.
There are also a number of small independent wrestling organizations that are upstarts or the creations of former wrestlers from the bigger promotions. Some of the smaller organizations include Ring of Honor, Jersey All Pro Wrestling, Border City Wrestling, Combat Zone Wrestling, and Ohio Valley Wrestling.
Structure.
Most promotions are organized around one or more championship titles and do not acknowledge or recognize the legitimacy of other promotions' titles. Others, such as the NWA, act as an umbrella organization which governs titles that are shared among multiple promotions.
Major promotions have a permanent roster of talent under contract to them, meaning they can only perform for them, in other words an "exclusive contract". Independent promotions may have contracted workers but are just as likely to utilize free agents who are not under exclusive contract with any promotion. Some wrestlers may work in several independent promotions at the same time.
In the United States and Canada, the typical business cycle consists of "standard" shows held at regular times (weekly, bi-weekly, monthly, etc.) which build up to a more expensive supercard event. This cycle lasts anywhere from four to twelve weeks. For smaller groups, supercards may only be held a few times a year. For larger groups such as WWE, the regular shows (referred to as "standard shows" from now on) are broadcast on television weekly (semi-weekly in the last boom period, currently weekly with shows like "Raw", "ECW" and "SmackDown") and the supercards on pay-per-view monthly (like WrestleMania and SummerSlam).
