Peter William Ham (April 27, 1947 – April 24, 1975) was a Welsh singer, songwriter and guitarist, best known as the prominent songwriter and singer of the 1970s group Badfinger.
Ham was born in Swansea, South Wales. He formed a local rock group called The Panthers in 1961. This group became The Iveys in 1965. The band was relocated to London by The Mojos manager, Bill Collins, in 1966, and they continued to perform for three years throughout the United Kingdon. Pete Ham especially took to songwriting and Ray Davies of The Kinks took initial interest in producing his group. In 1968, The Iveys came to the attention of Mal Evans (The Beatles personal assistant) and were eventually signed to the Beatles' Apple label after approval from all four Beatles, who were most impressed by dozens of demos recorded at home, mostly by Pete.
The Iveys changed their name to Badfinger with the single release of "Come And Get It," a song written by Paul McCartney, which became a worldwide Top Ten hit. Ham's hard work paid off eventually as his song "No Matter What" became another worldwide Top Ten hit record in late 1970. He followed up writing two more huge hits released in 1972, "Day After Day" and "Baby Blue" But the peak came with his co-written song "Without You" - a worldwide #1 hit as covered by Harry Nilsson in 1972. The song has since become one of the all-time ballad standards as covered by hundreds of singers including Mariah Carey and Clay Aiken. Ham was also used as a musician on Beatles solo records such as the "All Things Must Pass" LP by George Harrison and the single "It Don't Come Easy" by Ringo Starr.
Ham's group Badfinger did not have much success from 1973 to 1975 on the record label Warner Brothers Records. His group was mis-handled and eventually shut down by legal trouble caused by the group's business manager Stan Polley. Pete Ham comitted suicide on April 24, 1975 and left a note behind damning the manager and stating his faith in himself to handle adversity had been broken.
Pete Ham's legacy is that he revived the legacy of pop music, invigorating the power pop genre through the his many classic tunes he left behind. Two demo CD collections are have been made available, 7 Park Avenue and Golders Green.
