The Qur'an (in Arabic: القرآن) is the holy book of Islam, like the Holy Bible. It has been written and read only in Arabic for more than 1,400 years. But, because many Muslims around the world do not understand Arabic, the meaning of the Qur'an is also given in other languages, so that readers can understand better what the Arabic words in the Qur'an mean. These books are like dictionaries to the Qur'an - they are not read as part of the religion of Islam, to replace the Arabic Qur'an. Muslims believe that these translations are not true Qur'an; only the Arabic copy is the true Qur'an.
How Has The Qur'an Become A Holy Book?
The Qur'an did not become a holy book when Muhammad was alive; it was kept by oral communication. But according to a rumour, Abu Bekr used to write the verses on something when Muhammad was alive. Because it required to finish the all verses. When Abu Bekr was caliph, he brought the Qur'an to a holy book. Uthman, who is the third caliph, exterminated the footnotes which don't belong to Qur'an.
The Elements, Suras, Verses, Revelations.
There are 30 parts in the Qur'an.
Qur'an comprises 114 suras. 86 of these suras took place in Mecca, 24 of these suras took place in Medina. The suras which took place in Medina are Al-Baqara, Al Imran, Al-Anfal, Al-Ahzab, Al-Ma'ida, An-Nisa, Al-Mumtahina, Az-Zalzala, Al-Hadid, Muhammad(Sura), Ar-Ra'd, Ar-Rahman, At-Talaq, Al-Bayyina, Al-Hashr, An-Nasr, An-Nur, Al-Hajj, Al-Munafiqun, Al-Mujadila, Al-Hujraat, At-Tahrim, At-Taghabun, Al-Jumua, As-Saff, Al-Fath, At-Tawba, Al-Insan.
Each sura comprises the verses.
The Claims About Qur'an Were Not A Holy Book?
Some people claim that Qur'an was not sent by God; it was done by humans. Christoph Luxenberg, who works about semitics, claims that some verses of the Qur'an were used in the 6th and 7th centuries; the verses are based on Christian Breviaries.
Differences Between The Qur'an and the Bible.
The Qur'an is very different than the Bible because it was done by one man; the Bible contains many writers. The Qur'an also does not tell stories.
