Religion is a word for the ideas about the basic structure of the world that people cannot see or know with our other senses, or that scientists cannot study with machines. There are many different religions in the world.
Religions try to answer important but mysterious questions like "Where did the world come from?" and "What happens to us after we die?" When people believe that they have answers to these questions, they often start new religions, or add their new ideas to old religions. Many religions believe in supernatural beings such as spirits, angels, devils, polytheistic gods, or a monotheistic god, who can influence people and the world. People who teach or write about religion often say that they got their ideas from a supernatural being.
Many religions are very old, but new religions are always being created when some people aren't satisfied with the answers from the old religions. Things which are considered important and good by religions are called sacred or holy. Many religions have sacred books that give the most important ideas and stories of their religions.
Religions often teach how they believe people should behave in order to live happily together and/or to please God. Many religions believe that people who live in the right way will go to a pleasant place, or (heaven), after they die, or that people who live in a wrong way will go to a bad place, or (hell). How long one stays in these places depends on which belief system is asked. Hindus and Buddhists believe in temporary heavens and hells, where people go for being either extremely righteous or extremly evil, before uniting with God. Christians and Muslims, on the other hand, believe that heaven and hell are eternal states.
Some religions believe in the "Resurrection" - that God will bring some, most or all dead people alive again one day; while other religions believe in "Reincarnation" - that people will be born again as a new person or as an animal after they die. Usually this is believed to be according to how a person acts in their previous life. Some religions believe a mixture of all of these ideas.
Most religions teach people to be good and to help each other, but unfortunately religions also sometimes create problems. This is partly because the questions of religion are so important to people, and because it is difficult to be sure which answers are correct. Many people are unhappy when other people do not agree with their ideas about religion, or when they think that people will cause problems for their religion.
When this happens, people sometimes make wars against people of other religions, or punish people who do not agree with their ideas about religion. This has happened many times in history, and continues to happen today. At other times, wars have been begun for more selfish reasons that had really nothing to do with religion, but in order to win more support for these wars, the kings or politicians would try hard to make it seem to be about religion, or would give the people a supposedly 'religious' reason for fighting a war.
Many religions build buildings for their people to meet. In different religions, these buildings may be called churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, pathis, or shrines.
Many of the oldest, most beautiful, and most famous buildings are religious buildings.
Opposed to any form of religion is atheism, its argumentation can be support by such conceptions like Law of three stages
"See List of religions for more."
