"Romeo and Juliet" is the name of a play written by William Shakespeare, and first published in an incomplete form in 1597. It is a "tragedy" or sad play. It is one of Shakespeare's most famous and popular plays, being performed on stage very often, and also being made into movies. Shakespeare did not make the story up himself. It had already been written by an Italian writer called Luigi de Porto, and then made into a poem in English by a writer called Arthur Brooke. Shakespeare must have read Brooke's poem and thought it was a good story to make into a play. Historians think that perhaps the families in the original story were not really families at all, but two gangs called the Montercchi and the Capiletti from San Bonifacio.
The story.
The play is about two noble families that live in the old Italian city of Verona. The families are called the Montagues and the Capulets. Unfortunately, the fathers of the two noble houses have had an argument, and are enemies, so all their young servants are enemies as well. The young men who work for the Montagues and the Capulets get into gangs and fight each other in the street. Because it is fashionable to carry a sword, sometimes they get badly injured.
Verona is ruled by Prince Escalus. He tells the Montagues and the Capulets that there must be no more fighting or they will have to pay, but it is very hard to control the young men.
Montague has only one child, a teenage boy called Romeo. Capulet also has only one child, a beautiful 13-year-old daughter called Juliet. They do not know each other, because Juliet never goes anywhere without her nursemaid. However, Romeo and Juliet meet at a party and fall in love.
Their love should heal all the problems between their families, but because they are only teenagers, they think they will get into trouble from their parents, so they marry in secret. Because of their secret marriage, a series of things happen which brings about many deaths. The unhappy families of Montague and Capulet are finally brought together in grief.
About the play.
Because this play was written in the 1500s, the English language that it uses is not exactly like the English that is used today. One example is that in modern English we say "you" for one person and also "you" for more than one person. But in Shakespeare's English, he writes "thee" and "thou" when it means just one person.
Many words are used a little bit differently to the way they are used today, and other words are used that are now only used sometimes in poetry.
"Romeo and Juliet", like many of Shakespeare's plays, is written is several different forms.
Some of it is prose, which is like normal speaking. The servants in the play usually talk in prose.
For example, two Capulet servants are planning to cause trouble with two Montague servants who are walking down the street.
Some of the play is written in poetry which rhymes on the ends of the lines.
The play finishes with two lines that rhyme. This is called a "rhyming couplet".
The most famous scene.
Of all the scenes that have ever been written in plays, one of the most famous is in "Romeo and Juliet".
After Romeo and Juliet have met at a party and fallen in love, Juliet goes up to bed. But she cannot sleep so she stands at her window and pretends she is talking with Romeo.
This romantic scene has been acted and copied many times, sometimes seriously and sometimes for fun. One well-known scene that took its idea from this, is from "West Side Story", a musical by Leonard Bernstein, which takes place on a fire-escape landing with the lovers, Tony and Maria, singing the lovesong, "Tonight".
Movies.
Romeo and Juliet has been performed on stage many times. There have also been forty different films
