Radiation is when energy moves through space on its own at the speed of light. Scientists do not fully understand how this happens.
One theory of radiation is that it is made of a chain of electric and magnetic fields. That is why radiation is sometimes referred to as Electromagnetic radiation. Another theory is that it is made of tiny particles called photons. Radiation is known to be a wave of some type. Scientists categorize types of radiation based on its wavelength.
Radio waves: This is the type of wave that is used by radios to send or receive communication.
Radar waves: This is the type of radiation that is used by the military to spot airplanes in the sky and ships in the ocean.
Micro-waves: This is the type of radiation that is used by a microwave oven to warm up food.
Infrared waves: Most objects at room temperature emit infrared radiation. Although it is invisible to human eyes, special types of cameras can pick this up.
Visible light: This is the radiation that we see all around us.
Ultraviolet light: This is the type of radiation that gives people a sunburn.
X-rays and Gamma rays: These are high energy types of radiation that are usually thought of when most people hear the term radiation.
Most people hear terms like radiation and immediately think of it as a bad or dangerous thing. It turns out that only certain types of radiation are ordinarily harmful to humans. For example, ultraviolet radiation can give you a sunburn. X-rays and gamma rays can make a person sick, or even die if they are exposed to them for a long enough time.
Often we may hear about certain elements such as Uranium or Plutonium being radioactive. This means that the atoms they are made of tend to fall apart and give off gamma rays.
One can distinguish various sub-types of radiation. This depends on the type of the emission source, the wavelength, the energy, the carrier, etc. The most common use of the word "radiation" refers to ionizing radiation. Ionizing radiation has enough energy to ionize atoms or molecules while non-ionizing radiation does not. Radioactive material is a physical material that emits radiation, or energy.
