Rhetoric is the science of how to speak well. Rhetoric is a skill that can be trained, and taught. The rhetoric (from Greek ῥητορικὴ [τέχνη] "rhêtorik/ề [tékhnê/]", "technique/art of speech") represents correctly "the art of speaking well". It is the art or the technique of persuasion, usually through the usage of the word. The rhetoric, the dialectic and the grammar form the trivium which forms with the quadrivium the seven liberal arts of the Western culture. During the Antiquity and the Middle Ages, the rhetoric was directed towards the persuasion in the public and political conditions, also towards the gatherings and the courts of justice.
In this method, it was developed inside the open and democraticsocieties, the rights of expression, of free gathering and the rights political of a part of the people.
The idea of rhetoric was changed during the 2500 years of existence of this word. In our days, the rhetoric describes itself in a wide meaning, as the art or the method of persuasion also as the means of communication, but using the language. The words "rhetoric" or "sophism" are often used with a negative meaning, of disinformation, propaganda. They are also used for evaluating a speech with false arguments as of questionable value. As the art of persuasion, the rhetoric continues having a great importance inside the present-day public life.
According to Aristotle, rhetoric can be divided into
Definition.
The rhetoric is at the same time the science (in a meaning of study having structure) and the art (in a meaning of practice based on a tried knowledge) that applies to the action of the speech of the soul (the soul is quien speaks). With respect to the its idea, the rhetoric is only spoken, but of course busies itself also with the written speech that is a transcription or a facial expression (?) of the spoken. The definition of rhetoric would change with the passing of the centuries (given in common by the Greeks, by the Roman speakers, until the modern European people).
