Roman Catholicism (Catholic meaning 'universal') is the Christian church which is from the Apostles of two thousand years ago, led by the Bishops and the Pope, their chief.
Like other Christians, Catholics believe a divine person, Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Catholics believe that because of his love for all peoples, Jesus Christ died so that all of us will live forever in heaven. The Catholic Church teaches that Catholics should follow the example of love Jesus Christ teaches; to love each other so much that one is even willing to die for another. Catholicism also recognizes the Triune God (the Trinity). Which consists of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
The leader of the Roman Catholic religion is called the Pope. Catholics say Jesus Christ established the Catholic Church, and appointed the first Pope, a person named Saint Peter, to lead all Christians. Over the next 2,000 years, different Popes have lead the church. The current Pope is called Benedict and he lives in a country called Vatican City, a very small country inside the city of Rome, Italy. In addition to the Roman Catholic Church, the Pope also leads the Eastern Catholic churches. Together with the Roman Catholic Church, they are known as the Catholic Church.
Some of the traditional worship practices of Roman Catholics include making the sign of the cross, kneeling, bowing, and receiving the Eucharist during their worship ceremonies. Their main form of worship is called the Mass and is celebrated every day, and Catholics are required to attend on Sunday. They are also required to attend on Holy Days of obligation. In the United States, the Holy Days of Obligation are: Mary, Mother of God (January 1), The Assumption of Mary (August 15), The Immaculate Conception (of Mary) (December 8), The Ascension of Jesus (40 days after Easter), Christmas (December 25) and All Saints Day (November 1). These can be remembered by the following phrase: 3 for Mary, 2 for Jesus and 1 for all the saints. While these are all practices of Roman Catholics, other Christian churches also use many or all of these same practices. Catholics put more emphasis on the Virgin Mary (Jesus's mother) than other Christian denominations
The Catholic Church celebrates seven sacraments. A sacrament is "an outward sign instituted by Christ to give grace." This is a phrase that most catholics know verbatim. The seven sacraments are: Baptism, Confirmation, Reconciliation, Holy Matrimony, Holy Orders, Anointing of the Sick and the Most Holy Eucharist. The Eucharist is the most important of the sacraments, as Catholics believe that Jesus Christ becomes truly present, in the form of bread and wine, through an act of transubstantiation which takes place in the mass.
Catholics believe that some of the official statements that the Pope makes about their religion are true and cannot be proved incorrect, an idea called infallibility. Infallibility only occurs when the Pope is speaking "Ex Cathedra" which is Latin for "From the chair." The Pope is only infallible in matters of faith.
Catholics believe in the necessity of Love, hope and faith- in order to gain salvation, but that these all come from grace (a supernatural, unmerited gift of God). This is different from the 16th century interpretation created by Luther. Catholics interpret the Bible (Christian religious book) by Augustine's rule, and by Tradition. Tradition is the records of the teachings of the early church. Especially those before the what was in the bible was finalized in the fourth century. (The acceptance of the gospels was already current in the 2nd century). A basic rule for Catholics is that "Truth Cannot Contradict Truth". They translated the bible with this in mind. No interpretation of interpretable material can be accepted if it contradicts another revealed truth. The bible is considered revealed.
"We believe in one God, the Father, the Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all that is seen and unseen. We believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, eternally begotten of the Father, God from God, Light from Light, true God from true God, begotten, not made, one in being with the Father. Through Him all things were made. For us men and our salvation He came down from heaven: by the power of the Holy Spirit, He was born of the Virgin Mary, and became man. For our sake He was crucified under Pontius Pilate; He suffered, died, and was buried. On the third day He rose again in fulfillment of the scriptures: He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father. He will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead, and his kingdom will have no end. We believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son. With the Father and the Son, He is worshiped and glorified. He has spoken through the Prophets. We believe in one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church. We acknowledge one baptism for the forgiveness of sins. We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen. "
Eastern Orthodox or Protestant people believe many of the same things. They disagree on the role of saints, on what a priest can do, and on how exactly God should be worshipped.
