Rihanna (born Robyn Rihanna Fenty; February 20, 1988) is an R&B and Pop singer. She started her music career in 2005. She has released 3 studio albums, 1 DVD, and has featured in originally 2 singles. She released her debut album in 2005 called "Music of the Sun" which she released singles off the album like "Pon de Replay", and "That La, La, La".
Biography.
Rihanna was born in Saint Michael, Barbados to Ronald Fenty (of Irish and West Indian descent) and Monica Fenty (of Guyenese descent). She has two younger brothers, Rorrey and Rajad Fenty.
"Just Stand Up!".
"Just Stand Up!" is a song performed at the "Stand Up For Cancer" premier September of 2008. SHe featured in the single with other various R&B, Rock, Pop and Hip Hop singer like Mariah Carey, Beyoncé, Mary J. Blige, Rihanna, Fergie, Sheryl Crow, Melissa Etheridge, Natasha Bedingfield, Miley Cyrus, Leona Lewis, Carrie Underwood, Keyshia Cole, LeAnn Rimes, Ashanti and Ciara. "Just Stand Up!" is a song featuring the vocals of an all-star group of pop/R&B/rock performers, including American songwriter and producer Antonio "L.A." Reid conceived the collaboration after a meeting with the founder of Stand Up to Cancer, which will benefit from the proceeds of the record. Reid co-produced the track with American singer Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds, and the single was released on August 29 2008.
"If I Never See Your Face Again".
"If I Never See Your Face Again" is a song written by Maroon 5 members Adam Levine and James Valentine for Maroon 5's second studio album, "It Won't Be Soon Before Long" (2007). A remix of the song was recorded with extra verses sung by pop singer Rihanna, and was released as the fourth single from the album instead of the original version.
The music video, directed by Anthony Mandler, was shot on an indoor soundstage in Castaic, California on April 23 2008. One of the sets had to be repainted between takes. An MTV News reporter called the video "a fairly glam affair", and Levine referred to it as "this kind of ultra-glamorous, photography-based, late-'70s/ early-'80s situation" and "really stylish and really beautiful", saying that "[Rihanna's] physical presence is undeniable". "The Guardian" wrote, "The concept appears to be high-end erotica [...] If the [smartly furnished] sets resemble the kind of rooms nobody really lives in, then Rihanna sports a selection of outfits nobody really wears". The video premiered on May 13 on "Total Request Live". Rihanna said on The Today Show, when she went to perform for the Toyota Concert Series, and MTV's TRL that this was once of her favorite videos to make and enjoyed it.
Punk'd.
Rihanna was lead roll on the "practical joke" series on MTV 2 hosted by "Ashton Kutcher" called "Punk'd".
