Riaz Ahmed Gohar Shahi (ریاض احمدگوھرشاہی) (‎25 November, 1941 – 25 November, 2001) was a Pakistani author, spiritual leader and Founder of International Spiritual Movement Anjuman Serfaroshan-e-Islam. He was born in the Indian sub-continent, in a small village of Gohar Shah in the district of Rawalpindi.
Name.
His full name is Riaz Ahmed Gohar Shahi, which is in Urdu. The meaning of first part of his name Riaz is "Piece" or "Garden", Ahmed is another name of Muhammad and last two parts of his name Gohar Shahi means "Royal Gem". Gohar Shahi is used with his name because of his ancestor Baba Gohar Ali Shah who was a renowned Sufi and spiritualist. The village where Gohar Shahi was born is also dedicated to Baba Gohar Ali Shah for many centuries and called Dhok Gohar Shah, means “Village of Gohar Shah”. Gohar Shahi is the fifth generation of Baba Gohar Ali Shah.
History.
He was born on 25 November 1941 in Dhok Gohar Shah, a village located in District Rawalpindi, Pakistan. At the age of twenty, when Gohar Shahi was the owner of F. Q. Steel Industries (Registered) he started to search for spiritualism amongst the saints and dervishes of the time. He soon found that his heart remained unfulfilled. Eventually upon becoming disillusioned with the saints and dervishes which he encountered, and being disappointed in not receiving Spiritual Benevolence he returned to his work. Gohar Shahi then married and had three children.
At about the age of thirty four Bari Imam appeared before him and said: "My son your time has come, you must go to the shrine of Sultan Bahu to receive the Sacred Inner Dimensions of Spiritual Knowledge." Gohar Shahi then left his work, family and parents and went to Shorkot, where under the blissful supervision of Sultan Bahu made the book "Nurul Huda (Light of Guidance)" (a book written by Sultan Bahu), his journey's companion. He then went to Sehwan Sharif for self-mortification and peace of heart, and spent a period of three years in the mountains of Sehwan Sharif and the forest of Laal Bagh in Self-Purification.
In a very short span of time the message of Gohar Shahi became fairly popular in Pakistan and internationally. Gohar Shahi was invited to mosques, hindu temples, churches, Sikh temples, Imam Bargahs to deliver speech. He was the first ever Muslim Spiritual Leader who was invited by people of all faith in their places of worships.
The Teachings.
Gohar Shahi often talks about his three years in the wilderness, and sees them as the best part of his life. He returned to the world on the Commandment of God. Contrary to his expectations, he had to go through humiliation and rejections. In first four years of preaching the message, only five people favored it. Then, gradually young seekers accepted his teachings. He turned the hearts of several hundred thousand people towards the Remembrance and the Love of God. Gohar Shahi sought a spiritual revival based on Divine Love of God and emphasized Self-Purification through Dhikr-e-Qulb (Rememberance of Allah with HeartBeats). Gohar Shahi was invited to mosques, hindu temples, churches, Sikh temples, Imam Bargahs to deliver speech. He was the first ever Muslim Spiritual Leader who was invited by people of all faith in their places of worships. Gohar Shahi was in favor of divine love and considers it most important for an approach to God and no discrimination of caste, creed, nation or religion is accepted for Divine Love of God as every human has been gifted with an ability to develop spiritual power to approach to the essence of God. However, orthodox theological scholars criticized and condemned the teachings of Gohar Shahi.
Sufi's response.
Though orthodox theological scholars condemned the teachings of Gohar Shahi and criticized him heavily not just in Pakistan but throughout the world but on the other side number of internationally renowned Sufis including Shaykh Muhammad Hisham Kabbani and Sultan-al Awliya Shaykh Mawlana as-Sayyid Khwaja Muhammad Nazim Adil al-Haqqani al-Rabbani al-Qubrusi al-Firdausi an-Naqshbandi and Dr. Tahir-ul-Qadri.
They respected Gohar Shahi for his services rendered to the mankind to preach the Divine Love of God without any discrimination of Caste, Creed, Nation or Religion. Shaykh Muhammad Hisham Kabbani always used to sit beneath the feet of Gohar Shahi to give him respect and show fervor for him.
Apart from above sufis a number of sufis including Pir of Ghamkool Sharif, Pir of Dhannakka Sharif, Pir Kaki Tarrur, Ghulam Nabi Kashmiri alias Samandri Baba and Siraj Baba also respected and termed Gohar Shahi that HE is the one who has been the most honoured person by Allah.
Opposition.
Muslim sufi history witnessed that most of Sufis faced opposition and criticism of orthodox theological scholars(The Mullahs), even some were executed like Hallaj. Gohar Shahi also faced very strong opposition from different religious leaders and orthodox theological scholars, The teachings of Gohar Shahi were strongly condemned by orthodox theological scholars of the time, Muslim extremists and bigots developed enmity with Gohar Shahi. Many attempts were made to his life. A petrol bomb was thrown in his Manchester's residence. There was an attack with hand grenade during the discourse at his home in Kotri, Pakistan. A high price tag was put on his head in Pakistan. He was the subject of entrapment through five serious allegations.
Gohar Shahi's teachings have been condemned by Muslim religious leaders and the Pakistani government.
Gohar Shahi's supporters claim that the images of Gohar Shahi have been appeared on the Moon, Sun, and the Al-Hajar-ul-Aswad (Black Stone) of Kaaba caused greater opposition. He faced media-trial, due to pressure of religious extremists, the Government of Pakistan also used all sources to eliminate the organization of Gohar Shahi.
His books were banned by the Government of Pakistan, public meetings are not allowed to his followers and also no press coverage is allowed to either Gohar Shahi or to his followers due to charges of blasphemy law. Several cases were filed against Gohar Shahi and his followers.
Gohar Shahi, and many of his followers, were later convicted under Islamic blasphemy laws by an antiterrorist court in Sindh. Gohar Shahi was convicted in absentia—as he was in England at that time—resulting in sentences that totaled approximately 59 years. Gohar Shahi died abroad, prior to any decision on appeals filed with the High Court of Sindh.
Death.
Gohar Shahi died in UK on 25 November, 2001. Pneumonia was the reason of his death. His body was brought back to Pakistan from England and buried in Makazi Aastana at Kotri, where the International Secretariat of International Spiritual Movement Anjuman Serfaroshan-e-Islam is located. His devotees perform pilgrimage to his mausoleum. Though Gohar Shahi died but the followers of Gohar Shahi strongly believed that the Gohar Shahi had left for his heavenly abode whilst traveling abroad and his mortal remains had been transported back, buried at his home in Kotri, but that his soul goes marching on and soon Gohar Shahi will return with Jesus before the doomsday. The term for the demise of Gohar Shahi is used as “Occultation” instead of death and no urs celebration is held, which is a common tradition of all Sufis. Gohar Shahi's family still resides in Kotri including his widow, five sons and a daughter. The area where the residence of Gohar Shahi located is called Khuda ki Basti means "Locality of God" and the Kotri also consider as sacred place for the followers of Gohar Shahi and they call it Kotri Sharif (کوٹری شریف) means Noble Kotri.
