Reptilian humanoids are a common motif in mythology, folklore, cryptozoology, science fiction, fantasy, ufology, and conspiracy theories. Depending on context they are known by many names, including Snakepeople, Reptoids, Dinosauroids, Lizardfolk, or Lizardmen'".
They are variously said to be beings that evolved on Earth parallel to mankind, extraterrestrials, supernatural entities, or the remains of a pre-human civilization.
Mythology.
Reptilian humanoids of varying depictions have been common in the myths and legends of many cultures throughout history.
Europe.
Cecrops I, the mythical first King of Athens was half man, half snake. This is illustrated, for example, on a frieze on the Pergamon Altar in Pergamum. In these images from Pergamum, some of which depict gigantomachy, one sees the giant Klyteros with huge serpents between his legs. Boreas (Aquilon to the Romans) was the Greek god of the cold north wind, described by Pausanias as a winged man with serpents between his legs. The ancient Greek cult of Glycon worshipped a snake god who had the head of a man. The Lamia, a child-devouring female demon from Greek mythology, was half woman, half serpent.
India.
In Indian scriptures and legends, the Nāga (Devanagari: नाग) are reptilian beings said to live underground and interact with human beings on the surface. In some versions, these beings were said to have once lived on a continent in the Indian Ocean that sank beneath the waves. Indian texts also refer to a reptilian race called the "Sarpa" (Devanagari: सर्प). The Syrictæ of India (not to be confused with the Sciritae of ancient greece) were a legendary tribe of men with snake-like nostrils in place of noses and bandy serpentine legs.
East Asia.
The Chinese, Vietnamese, Korean and Japanese speak throughout their history of 龍 ("Lóng") ("Yong" in Korean, "Ryu" in Japanese) or dragons, conceived of in both physical and non-physical forms, but rarely depicted in humanoid form, though they may assume a non-reptilian human form.
In China, Korea and Japan, underwater realms are referred to where the Dragon Kings and their descendants live, as well as a lineage of humans descended from a race of dragons. This lineage was often claimed by East Asian emperors, who were believed to be able to change from human to dragon form at will.
In Japan, there are myths about the kappa, or lizard men who live near rivers and attack passers by.
Middle East.
In the Middle East, reptilian beings ranging from certain Jinn to dragons and serpent-men have been spoken of since ancient times. In one of the apocryphal books falsely purporting to be the lost Book of Jasher, a serpent race is described.
In the Book of Genesis, God punishes the serpent for deceiving Eve into eating the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil by decreeing, "Upon thy belly thou shalt go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of your life" (Genesis 3:14 KJV). Traditionally, many have felt this implied that the serpent (a snake or reptile) had legs before then. Thus It is therefore often portrayed in Western art as a humanoid (woman) with a snake's tail, and sometimes lizard-like feet, as in a detail from Bosch's "Last Judgement".
Mesoamerica.
Quetzalcoatl, the "feathered serpent", was the creator god and sky god of the Aztecs. He was variously depicted as a man, a serpent, or a reptilian humanoid.
Scientific speculation.
In a thought experiment published in 1982, paleontologist Dale Russell, curator of vertebrate fossils at the National Museum of Canada in Ottawa, conjectured that, had the Chicxulub meteorite not exterminated the dinosaurs 65 million years ago, bipedal predators (theropods) which existed at that time, such as "Troodon", would have evolved into intelligent beings similar in body plan to humans. Troodontids had semi-manipulative fingers, able to grasp and hold objects to a certain degree, and binocular vision. Like most dinosaurs of the troodontid family, this imaginary creature, which Russell called the "Dinosauroid", would have had large eyes and three fingers on each hand, one of which would have been partially opposed. As with most modern reptiles (and birds), its genitalia would have been internal. Russell speculated that it would have required a navel, as a placenta aids the development of a large brain case. However, it would not have possessed mammary glands, and would have fed its young, as birds do, on regurgitated food. Its language would have sounded somewhat like bird song. Russell's fanciful speculation has been met with criticism from other paleontologists since the 1980s, many of whom point out that Russell's Dinosauroid is overly anthropomorphic. Gregory S. Paul (1988) and Thomas R. Holtz Jr., consider it "suspiciously human" (Paul, 1988) and argue that a large-brained, highly intelligent troodontid would retain a more standard theropod body plan, with a horizontal posture and long tail, and would probably manipulate objects with the snout and feet in the manner of a bird, rather than with human-like "hands". Turkish artist Nemo Ramjet has used these new approaches to the original thought experiment to re-interpret the Dinosauroid, going so far as to create "Dinosauroid cave art", which depicts sentient, tool-using troodontids and other dinosaurs and pterosaurs, painted using sticks and feathers.
Cryptozoology.
Claims of reptilian humanoid cryptids have occurred in many places. A "lizard man" has been rumored to be stalking South Carolina for decades. First reported in Scape Ore Swamp in 1988, the creature was claimed to have been sighted again in 2008. Claims of a reptilian humanoid surfaced in the 1970s in Thetis Lake, Canada, though the local police attributed the sightings to an escaped Tegu lizard. A humanoid froglike creature has occasionally been reported around Loveland, Ohio since the 1950s.
Conspiracy theories.
There are a variety of conspiracy theories involving reptilian humanoids. Some believe that the so-called Greys are in fact reptiles, and should be categorized as "Reptoids", others that Reptoids are an entirely different species working with or in opposition to the Greys. Some conspiracy promoters, especially David Icke, have also claimed that they are capable of shape-shifting.
UFOs.
In modern times some claim to have encountered reptilian humanoids. In many of these cases a UFO is part of the encounter; alien abduction narratives sometimes allege contact with reptilian creatures.
One of the earliest reports is that of Ashland, Nebraska police officer Herbert Schirmer. On December 3, 1967, Schirmer claims to have been taken aboard a UFO that appeared just outside of Ashland, where he encountered humanoid beings, 4 feet 6 inches to 5 feet (1.38 m to 1.53 m) tall, who wore close-fitting silvery gray uniforms, boots, and gloves. Their heads were thin, and longer than a human head. The skin on their faces was grey-white, the nose flat, the mouth merely a slit which did not move, even when they spoke. Their eyes were slightly slanted. While only slightly reptilian in their outward appearance, these beings bore a "winged serpent" emblem on the left side of their chest. Schirmer alleged that the beings are from another galaxy, and have bases on Earth.
David Icke.
According to writer David Icke, 7-foot (2.1 m) tall, blood-drinking reptilian humanoids from the star system Alpha Draconis are the force behind a worldwide conspiracy directed at humanity. The reptilians maintain their control through the generation of fear and negative emotion, which is food to these entities, by manufacturing conflicts, primarily wars. He contends that most of the world's leaders are in fact related to these reptilians.
According to an interview with David Icke, Christine Fitzgerald claims that she was a confidante of Diana, Princess of Wales, and that Diana told her that the British Royal Family were reptilian aliens, and that they could shapeshift. Icke also claims that many presidents of the United States have been and are reptilian humanoids. In his view, United States foreign policy after September 11 is the product of a reptilian conspiracy to enslave humanity completely in a "New World Order," with George W. Bush and other minor and major political figures being the conduits used for the unfolding of this Reptilian conspiracy.
Icke draws connections between the reptilian aliens in his theories and the Annunaki depicted in Zecharia Sitchin's "12th Planet", which has led to other conspiracy theorists referring to reptilian humanoids as the "Annunaki"; however, Sitchin himself has always described his Annunaki as purely humanoid.
John Rhodes.
John Rhodes was the first person to publicly present claims of reptilian-humanoid sightings and contact. He established the Reptoids.com website in 1997 to collect, review and present his claims of reptoid activity. He has also appeared on television and radio shows giving interviews about his beliefs on Reptoids.
Rhodes contends that the majority of the reptilian humanoids are descendants of the dinosaurs and are biological byproducts of Earth evolution. Rhodes cites the 1980s thought experiment of Dale Russell (see above) as an example of scientific projection that correlates his "Evolved Reptoid" theory. Rhodes also states that human attention has been intentionally misdirected away from the underworld toward deep space, so the subject of underground Earth dwelling Reptoids and lost ancient civilizations can remain secret.
Politics.
During a provincial election in Ontario, Canada on September 12, 2003, the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario disseminated a press release describing Ontario Liberal Party opposition leader Dalton McGuinty as an "Evil reptilian kitten-eater from another planet".
In the closely fought 2008 US Senate election between comedian and commentator Al Franken and incumbent Senator Norm Coleman, one of the ballots challenged by Coleman included a vote for Franken with "Lizard People" written in the space provided for write-in candidates. Rejecting the Franken lawyer's argument that "Lizard People" was not a valid write-in and thus not an overvote, the canvassing board ruled that the ballot was in fact an overvote, and as such, was not counted as a vote for either.
In fiction.
Reptilian humanoids are a common theme in fiction, whether fantasy or science fiction. Because of the aversion that many people have for reptiles in general, reptile-like aliens are often the villain in such works. One observer notes, "Science fiction writers and movie producers are well aware of how appearances affect us, and they are able to construct their aliens to achieve the desired dramatic effects. We may respond favorably to those that remind us of children or pets, and less favorably to those that remind us of lizards... or other creatures that have 'image' problems... For many animals, large eyes or eyelike patterns tend to elicit fear and escape responses. One possible explanation for this is that large, staring eyes often belong to predators. Immense eyes or eyelike appendages may also be threatening to humans, and this threat may contribute to an aversion to 'bug-eyed monsters'."
Another explanation notes the "slimy" feel of reptiles, rather than their appearance, as a source of horror. R. Rawdon Wilson, Professor Emeritus of the Department of English at the University of Alberta, explored the theme in "The Hydra's Tale: Imagining Disgust": "Because of the genre's emphasis upon explicit images, horror films are rich in examples of wetness and dissolution... In "Alien", "Aliens", and "Alien3" and "Alien Resurrection", the xenomorphic monsters drip liquid from their mouths in improbable ways... The association with slime is more fundamentally established in the stages of the alien's developmental phases. It is a "Linnean nightmare, defying every natural law of evolution; by turns bivalve, crustacean, reptilian, and humanoid..."
Human-like reptiles have appeared in various popular treatments, from early pulp short stories and novellas, to full novels, comic books, television features, films, and the gaming industry.
