Robosexuality is where a person is sexually attracted to machines such as robots. Robosexuality is a combining of "robot" and "sexual".
Possible coinciding sexualities.
A robosexual can be heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, or pansexual. This is because the robot may have sexual features. Many robots in the world do not show male or female qualities, so a pansexual-robosexual would feel attracted to these, if the robot appeared human. If a person is attracted to a robot that does not appear human it is called paraphilia.
Robosexuality in the East.
Roughly 50% of all the robots in the world are in Asia, 32% in Europe, and 16% in North America, 1% in Australasia and 1% in Africa.
40% of all robots in the world are found in Japan.
In Japan and South Korea, ideas of future robots have been mainly positive. The number of robots in Japan means more people in Japan are likely to have a love of gadgets. Manga and anime series in both countries often show love or sex between robots and humans. This would mean more robosexuality.
Japanese religious beliefs allow the idea that robots have souls. This also make the idea of love between humans and robots more acceptable or ordinary.
Robosexuality in the West.
In the west robots and other machines are not given any human feelings or a soul as in Japan. Therefore the idea of physical sexuality is less accepted. Western societies are more likely to be against, or even fear the development of robots. This is because a lot of films and books show robots as replacing humans instead of helping them. Also, the religious beliefs in this area of the world (Christian, Islam, and Judaism) show robots to be wrong, because they are doing God's part in creating, which they say only God should do.
'RealDoll' is a lifesize sex-doll sold in America, that can be sold with robotic implants. People who feel sexually attracted, or have sex with these, are robosexual. However, one important thing to notice is that this American machine does not move and think by itself, unlike their Japanese and South Korean counterparts.
