"Star Wars" is a series of science-fiction movies by George Lucas. The six movies have been made through his company, Lucasfilm, and released by 20th Century Fox.
"Star Wars" has been so popular that there have been "Star Wars" books, video games, television shows, toys, and more.
They are also known for one of the most popular scores ever written for a movie, by John Williams.
In these movies, robots are called "droids", taken from the English word "android" (meaning human-like), even though many of them do not have a very human appearance. There are also laser swords that are called "lightsabers", they create pain or even death to living organisms.
'The Force'.
The Force is a magic-like power, and in ways it is like a religion. It is a belief that there is a 'force' which controls everything within the galaxy. It controls life, the people, plants, animals, feelings, the orbit of the planet, the seasons, even the weather. So 'The Force' is really an all powerful 'thing', which is always there but you cannot see it, you just know it is there.
The Jedi.
The Jedi are a group of beings who use The Force to bring peace and harmony to people, planets, and cultures. They are trained to use the force for good purposes. They are sworn enemies with another group called the Sith. Usually, they use green,blue,yellow or purple lightsabers.
The Sith.
The Sith are group of beings who use the force as a power source, they are trained to use the force to gain ultimate power. The Sith normally use the force to gain power in battles with their enemy who are The Jedi. They also use the force to bring destruction to the universe and anything in their way. So they are the bad guys.
The Lightsaber.
The lightsaber is a weapon used by the Jedi and the Sith. It can be described simply as a light sword. These weapons are very special to a Jedi or Sith. They are custom built to special specifications by the Jedi or Sith. The Sith tend to take a Jedi's lightsaber as a prize if they win the battle. Many epic battles have been fought with lightsabers between the Jedi and the Sith and there have been very big wars between the two cultures, which have divided the galaxy and sometimes turned planets into ruins. These wars include 'The Great Sith War' and 'The Clone Wars', but the Clone Wars were fought between the Republic and a group of Separatists. In the Clone Wars, the Jedi and the Sith both took sides, the Jedi fought for the Republic and the Sith fought with the Separatists to try and form 'The 1st Galactic Empire' (read the spoiler below to see who prevailed if you don't already know). They use red lightsabers.
Story.
Anakin Skywalker is a young boy who can use the Force, which is a magic-like power. The Force can move things without touching and can predict what is soon to happen. The people who use the Force for good are called Jedi; the people who use the force for evil are called the Sith. Two Jedi, Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi, find Anakin and help him. After many years, the galaxy's government has a war with planets who left the government, this war was known as 'The Clone Wars' because of the very big 'Clone' army the government had produced. Anakin helps the Jedi save many people and many planets. But then it turns out that the leader of the government is a Sith Lord, and he gets Anakin to help him kill all the Jedi. Anakin then turns into a villain named Darth Vader.
Anakin has two children with Senator Amidala, Luke and Leia, that he does not know about. Senator Amidala died as she was giving birth to her twin children. After birth, the twins would be separated to prevent the Dark Side from getting the children. Obi-Wan Kenobi sent Luke to a planet called Tatooine to live with his Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru. Leia was raised by Senator Bail Organa of Alderaan. United together again later in life, Luke and Leia help fight the evil government, called the Empire. Luke also learns from Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda on learning the ways of a Jedi. In the end, they beat the Empire. Luke also helps Anakin be good again. The galaxy is saved.
Expanded universe.
Many books, short movies, and videogames have been produced that deal with events that do not happen in the original movies, mainly the rebuilding of the Republic after the Empire's defeat. They are set anywhere from 5,000 years before Episode I to more than one hundred years after Episode VI.
TV series and specials.
Upcoming Star Wars the T.V. Show
