Sexual reproduction is a way of reproduction of some animals and plants. Some protists and fungi also reproduce this way. Organisms that "reproduce sexually" have two different sexes: male and female. Offspring is made by a cell from the male and a cell of the female.
Different steps are involved in the process. Each of the two cells has a complete set of chromosomes. Something therefore needs to be done to make sure that the resulting cell does not have two sets of them, only one. This process is called meiosis. The second step is called fertilization. In it, the two cells merge into one. During meiosis, cross over occurs. This makes it possible to get genetic recombination. This means, that for each copying step involved, there is a certain probability of failure. This leads to more diversity in the genome.
There are many advantages and disadvantages of sexual reproduction.
Advantages: Allows variation within species that assists with the species survival.
Gonads are specialized sex organs where gametes are formed. In the male, the gonad is the testes, while in the female, the gonad is the ovaries.
Gametes are specialized sex cells formed in gonads by gametogenesis. The male gamete is the sperm, and the female is ova.
Spermatogensis goes from 1 diploid spermatogonium to four mature sperm (haploid)
Oogenesis (genesis of ova)-Goes from 1 diploid oogonium to three polar bodies and 1 ovum (haploid).
Sperm: Male Sex cell, microscopic, many mature created at one time.
Ovum: Female Sex cell, largest cell in body, created from birth, fixed # able to mature
Hermaphorodites: organism containing male AND female sex organs.
-able to reproduce with a second parent
Fertilizations: sperm penetrates membrane of ovum. structure that now exists (single cell)-> zygote.
Cleavage: through mitosis cell # increases, short time in interhase so cell size decreases.
stimulated by fertilization, continues until cell size reaches that of an organism's somatic cells.
2.)Blastula: hollow ball of cells filled w/ fluid (blastocoel)
Gastrulation: -Blastula continues to grow, cell continue mitosis,
-2.)Several 100 cells on 1 side begin to move in & form a 2 layer embryo.
-3.) Developed into 2 layer embryo which is endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm.
Ectoderm developes into nervous system, which includes the brai, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves. Also, the lining of mouth, anus, nostrils, spidermis, sweat glands, hair, nails.
Mesoderm developes into bones, muscles, reproductive system, excretory system, blood, blood vessels, inner layer of skin.
Endoderm developes into lining of digestive system, respiratory system, liver, pancreas, and bladder.
differentiation-changing of unspecialized embryonic cells into specializd cells to tissue and organs. Ectoderm begins to form nervous system.
-within cytoplasm, there are substances that control differentiation.
-Parts of DNA tuned on/off determines role of cell.
