A person sleeps when he or she is not awake. Usually, this is during the night. During the day, most people are awake. They work, go to school or university, or do other things. Most small children and many adults sleep for a short time, called a nap, in the early afternoon.
What sleep is for.
Generally, the reason for sleep is that the brain has work to do during sleep. The details are not fully understood, but it is important to get enough sleep for the body and the brain to be healthy and work properly. Usually animals (and people) sleep at periodic intervals, such as once a day. Certain animals send out signals to the others that they will soon go to sleep. Yawning is such a signal.
Both humans and many animals sleep about once a day. Some animals, such as cats, sleep many times a day for short periods.
When people sleep they often have dreams. Probably some animals do, too.
Not only people sleep, all mammals and birds, and most fish, reptiles and other animals do, too.
Different categories of sleep.
In mammals and birds, sleep can be divided into two categories. In one of them, the eyes move rapidly. It is called REM-sleep (from "rapid eye movement"). Most dreams take place in this phase. REM-sleep occurs normally at intervals throughout the night, and the periods of REM-sleep increase in length in the second half of the night.
The other category, where this movement of the eyes does not happen, is called NREM-sleep (Non-REM sleep). Usually, dreams do not occur during this time. There are four stages of NREM-sleep. Stage I is just barely sleeping, or dozing. Stage II is also light sleep. Normally, in adult humans, about half of the time spent asleep is spent in light sleep, stages I and II. Stages III and IV are called deep sleep. Deep sleep is necessary for growth and healing. It can be quite difficult to awaken someone who is in stage III or stage IV sleep.
Adult humans normally sleep in cycles of 90 to 110 minutes each. The night's sleep can be 4 or 5 of these cycles. Each cycle includes, in this order: stage I, stage II, stage III, stage IV, stage III, stage II and REM.
Getting enough sleep.
The timing of sleep and the amount of it are both important. Both are different for different people. Some adults sleep best from 22:00 to 05:00 or 06:00 or 07:00. Some sleep best from midnight to seven or eight. These variations are normal.
How much sleep is enough also depends on age. Children need more sleep than adults. Newborn babies sleep about 18 hours per day. Small babies sleep many times a day; human babies do not develop circadian rhythms before they are 3 - 4 months old. At the age of 1 year, they sleep for about 14 hours.
A nine-year-old should sleep about 9-10 hours per day and teenagers, too, need that much sleep. Adults who sleep less than about 8 hours a day perform worse than those who sleep that long.
Sleeping problems.
People may have trouble going to sleep, staying asleep or getting enough sleep. This usually means that they are too sleepy in the daytime.
There are many things that influence sleep. Also some substances, called stimulants - coffee is such an example - can cause poor sleep. When people have just eaten something, the body is busy digesting. This can cause poor sleep, too. Worrying and stress can cause poor sleep.
There are many diseases that cause poor sleep - some do because of side effects. That way, fever can lead to bad dreams.
Sleep disorders directly influence how a person sleeps. Examples of sleep disorders are narcolepsy, sleep apnea and circadian rhythm sleep disorders.
Doctors often suggest better sleep hygiene to people who have sleeping problems. Sleep hygiene means things people can try, such as
