A sandwich is a light snack prepared by placing various fillings between two pieces of bread. The pieces of bread in a sandwich are referred to as slices or sheets of bread. The snack is thought to have been made first for the Earl of Sandwich, hence the name. Many people enjoy the sandwich as it is easy and quick to make in a hurry. Also, the sandwich can be easily eaten with one hand without utensils which allows consumers to have a hand free to do other things. Some people prefer to eat a sandwich with both hands.
Sandwiches are often given to children to eat at school. The sandwiches are put in a lunchbox and often wrapped in cling film to keep them fresh.
Sandwich Variations.
A sandwich is not just limited to a filling between two pieces of bread. Sometimes the filling can be placed between more layers of bread. For instance, a double decker sandwich would consist of three slices of bread with two layers of fillings. The double decker sandwich is so called because each layer of bread forms a deck much like a double decker London Bus. A club sandwich is a double decker sandwich with chicken, bacon and salad. A triple decker sandwich would consist of four slices of bread with three layers of topping.
Another accepted sandwich variant is the toasted sandwich in which the bread bits of the sandwich are put into a toaster. Sometimes the warm bread will then heat the fillings or the filling is heated before being put into the sandwich.
Sandwiches can be made with different types of bread, and are often then called different names. A toasted sub, for example, is called a panini.
Sandwich Formulae.
Standard Sandwich Bread > Filling > Bread
Double Decker Bread > Filling A > Bread > Filling B > Bread
Triple Decker Bread > Filling A > Bread > Filling B > Bread > Filling C > Bread
"n" Decker Bread > Filling 1 > Bread... Filling "n" > Bread
Sandwiches In Popular Culture.
In one episode of the Apprentice, the apprentices were required to make sandwiches for Donald Trump.
In the french film Taxi the protagonist is made a special sandwich with half Bayonne ham, half Paris. This later sparks the jealousy of another character.
In the Warner Brothers cartoon Scooby Doo, Scooby was well known to love making Sandwiches with Shaggy having many many layers, often with a great variety of fillings.
In the TV Series Buffy, during episode 61, Buffy eyes a classmate eating a sandwich, snatches it and hungrily scarfs it down.
Sandwiches In Star Trek.
Scotty used the word sandwich to refer to the makeup of a piece of technology which was made of three layers of two materials, which caused the food synthesizer in the galley of the USS Enterprise to believe that he was requesting a meal. Scotty canceled the process by kicking the offending unit.
Captain Rachel Garrett enjoyed a sandwich and salad for her lunch-time meal.
Sandwich Slang.
There are a number of other words that can be used in the place of the term sandwich.
Sarney or Sarnie - England
Grainy Bread Trap - Tasmania
Malty Doorstep - New Zealand
Le Sand - France
Sandwich Facts.
The largest sandwich ever made consisted of 1,000kg (2,200lbs) of ostrich meat betweem two sheets of bread to make a 1,500m (4,920ft) long sandwich.
