A scone is a kind of baked bread.
Scones are soft and light.
A scone is a bread thicker than a bannock. It is made of wheat, barley or oatmeal, usually with baking powder as leavening agent. The pronunciation in the United Kingdom is open to debate. Some sections of the population pronounce it as sk'on (to rhyme with gone), and the rest pronounce it sk'own (to rhyme with cone). The former pronunciation is more popular in Scotland.
The scone closely resembles a North American biscuit (many recipes are, in fact, the same) — itself not to be confused with the Commonwealth biscuit, which North Americans call a "cookie". In the United States, there is a growing tendency to refer to sweet variations as "scones" (perhaps under influence from espresso bars, where they are popular fare), while savoury ones are known as "biscuits"; in Canada, both tend to be called "biscuits" or "tea biscuits".
In the Commonwealth, scones frequently include raisins, currants, cheese or dates. In the United States, scones sold by coffee shops often include sweeter and more elaborate fillings, such as cranberries, blueberries, nuts, or even chocolate chip scones. In both the Commonwealth and North America, mass-produced scones tend to be doughier than home-made scones.
In Scotland and Ulster savoury varieties of scone include soda scones, also known as soda farls, and potato scones, normally known as tattie scones, which resemble small, thin savoury pancakes made with potato flour. Potato scones are most commonly served fried in the local equivalent of the full English breakfast. As well as fruit scones (with raisins) or cheese scones, common varieties include milk scones, cream scones, bran or wheaten scones and treacle scones.
The scone is a basic component of the cream tea.
The griddle scone is a variety of the scone. In some countries one may also encounter savoury varieties of scone which may contain or be topped with combinations of cheese, onion, bacon etc.
In the Scots language, a griddle is referred to as a "girdle". Therefore "griddle scones" are known as "girdle scones". This should not be confused with the girdle as a piece of ladies' underwear.
