The Solar System is the astronomical name for the Sun and the collection of planets, comets and other objects moving around it.
The Earth moves around the Sun in an oval shaped, or "elliptical" orbit. The other planets in the Solar System also move around the Sun in elliptical orbits.
The biggest objects that go around the Sun are called planets. It took people many years of looking carefully through telescopes to find them. No new big ones have been found for a long time, but more small objects are found every year. Most of the planets have moons that orbit around them. There are 166 of these moons in the solar system.
planets of solar system.
The planets are numbered (1) to (8) in order of distance from the sun and dwarf planets are letter "(A)" to "(E)".
Structure.
There are a few main parts of the Solar System. The terrestrial inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars) are the four closest planets to the sun and all have rocky surface. Between Mars and Jupiter is the asteroid belt and after that are the Gas Giants, (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune). They are all bigger than Earth and are mostly made up of gas. This group are the four biggest planets in the Solar System.
After them is another, larger asteroid belt called the Kuiper belt. This contains many comets and asteroids as well as the dwarf planets Pluto, Haumea, Makemake, and Eris. After this scientists think there may be an even bigger asteroid belt called the Oort cloud although since it is hard to see they cant be sure.
Pluto is no longer a planet.
Pluto has been called a planet since it was discovered in 1930. In 2006, astronomers decided Pluto should no longer be called a planet because it is too small. Also, its orbit is very different from the other eight planets, as its orbit slants a little. It is now called a dwarf planet along with four others Ceres, Haumea, Eris and
Order of discovery.
Before the discovery of Uranus, ancient thoughts of the solar system consisted only of the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn as much as ancient records go.
Long ago, ancient scientists thought the Sun (and the whole solar system) orbited the Earth and that Venus was a star and not a planet.
