Scar is a fictional character and the main villain in Walt Disney Pictures' popular 1994 animated movie "The Lion King". He was voiced by Jeremy Irons (except at the final of "Be Prepared", where he was voiced by Jim Cummings) and his supervising animator was Andreas Deja. Scar is one of four Disney characters to be nominated for "Best Villain" in the MTV Movie Awards (the other three being the White Witch, Captain Barbossa and Davy Jones), and is also the only Disney animated character to have achieved this. In ', Scar was voiced by Jim Cummings again.
The Lion King.
In the first movie, the animals go and see Simba. In the next scene, Scar is playing with a mouse telling it that "life's not fair, is it?". Mufasa is mad at Scar for not coming to see Simba. Scar tells Simba later on in the movie about the elephant graveyard and says "an elephant graveyard is no place for a young prince. Opps!". This is likely a poke at "Bambi", as in Bambi the main character is "the young prince". Simba takes his best friend Nala with him and have to go with Zazu the hornbill. Zazu talks about Simba and Nala getting "betroved" (meaning they're going to be married). This similar to Bambi as Bambi and Faline were supposed to be married and in Felx Salten's original book, "Bambi, A Life in the Woods", they were cousins. This is another controversy surrounding "The Lion King" as that other than Mufasa and Scar, there are no other grown male lions in the group, making Simba and Nala cousins. Simba sings a song to distract Zazu away from them, and Simba and Nala enter the elephant graveyard. They almost get killed by three hyenas, "Shenzi, Banzai, and Ed", who are friends with Scar. Mufasa comes just in time to save Simba and Nala from the hyenas, and Mufasa tells Simba about what he did wrong. Meanwhile, Scar tells Shenzi, Banzai, and Ed how he plans to get rid of Mufasa and Simba in a song called "Be Prepared". Scar then tells Simba to wait in the gorge for a "to die for" surprise. A huge stampede ensures, and Mufasa saves Simba in time, but doesn't make it in time to save himself from Scar. Scar flings Mufasa into the gorge, where he falls to his death, and tells Simba it was all his fault. He tells Simba to "run. Run away and never return." Then he sends the hyenas to go kill Simba, but he escapes. They shout threats at him, saying things like "if ya ever come back, we'll kill ya!". Scar tells everyone about the stampede, saying Simba died too. When Simba finally meets back with Nala, he finds out what has happened to pride rock. Simba still thinks he's not who he used to be and that it was his fault Mufasa died and that Scar is the right king. But with some help from Rafiki ("friend" in the African language Swahili), he realizes that he must "take his place in the Circle of Life". Simba challenges Scar in an epic battle, and finds out that it was Scar who killed Mufasa. Scar blames everything on the hyenas, but Simba doesn't believe this. Simba finally defeats Scar where he falls of a cliff, something that happens in many Disney movies, and he says "ah! My friends!"
Shenzi says "friends? I thought he said we were the "enemy"!" Banzi agrees saying "yeah! That's what I heard." They both turn and say "Ed?". Ed laughs in agreement and Scar tries to explain but the hyenas eat him as a fire starts, and everything settles down. Simba reclaims his rightful place "in the Circle of Life", and the next spring everything is back and better than ever. The movie ends with Simba and Nala having a cub of their own.
The Lion King II: Simba's Pride.
Scar appears in ' in Simba's nightmare that is similar to the stampede sequence in the first movie. Mufasa is falling and Simba is trying to save him. But Scar tells Simba to trust him and let go. Mufasa falls and Simba is angry. Suddenly Scar turns into Kovu and trows Simba into the stampede. In "The Lion King II", the new villain, Zira, has a group of friends that were probably with Scar. Simba has banished them of course. In another scene of "The Lion King II", Kovu is being banished and looks into a puddle of water and sees Scar's reflection instead of his own.
The Lion King 1½ ‎.
Scar appears a few times in "The Lion King 1½", without speaking. He last appears as he falls to his death.
