"Super Mario Bros. Deluxe" is a 1999 Game Boy Color video game by Nintendo. It features the 1985 classic "Super Mario Bros.". It is the first game that has the original "Super Mario Bros." on a handheld console. Gamers can play the game on the go as a result.
In this game, Bowser has kidnapped Princess Toadstool. Mario must go through the eight worlds of the Mushroom Kingdom to save her. "Deluxe" is the first game to have ported, or transferred to a new system, a Nintendo Entertainment System game.
The game was well received by the media. They liked how well the port was done and hoped that "Deluxe" would be be the first of many NES to Game Boy Color ports.
Original 1985.
This is the original "Super Mario Bros." game as it debuted in the year 1985. One change is that players can now save the game. The original game did not have a save feature. Players can only save while playing a level, and there are three save files. This version also has a world map that players stay on before entering a level.
Challenge.
In challenge mode, players have three medals to earn: find all five red coins, find the Yoshi egg, and get a high score. The red coins are hidden and require the player to look up or down and find them in areas that are otherwise hard to get to. The Yoshi egg is hidden somewhere on the level. Each level has a high score already set; if the player ties or beats the high score, he or she will earn the medal for that level.
Vs. Game.
In Vs. Game, two players link up using the Game Boy Color link cable. The levels are full of white and red blocks. Red blocks block the player while white blocks make it easier to go through the level.
Boo.
Boo is a ghost that appears in the Mario world. The player can race against Boo on the same levels of the Vs. Game course.
For Super Players.
After the player scores 300,000 points in Original 1985 mode, this mode is unlocked. It contains the "The Lost Levels", which players could play before on "Super Mario All-Stars" for the SNES. It is not a true port. Wind and the way Luigi moves were removed. World 9 and A-D are also not in this game. This version also reuses the original "Super Mario Bros." graphics instead of the newer ones.
