Saw is the first of the 5 horror genre movies released in 2004. The movie was directed by James Wan and Leigh Whannel. The movie released in theaters on October 29, 2004.
Plot.
In an industrial washroom, photographer Adam Faulkner, Leigh Whannell and Dr. Lawrence Gordon (Cary Elwes) are chained by their ankles to pipes at opposite corners. Between them is a dead person (Tobin Bell) holding a revolver and a microcassette recorder. Lawrence and Adam each find tapes saying "Play Me." A tape tells Adam that he must escape the bathroom. Lawrence is told that he must kill Adam before six o'clock, or else his wife and daughter will be killed and he will be left to die where he sits. Hacksaws are soon found. The saws are not sharp enough to cut through their chains, and Adam throws his away in frustration. Lawrence realizes that the saws are not meant for the chains, instead for their feet.
Lawrence determines that their captor is the Jigsaw Killer, named due to his practice of cutting pieces of skin in the shape of a jigsaw puzzle piece from his victims, though Lawrence comments that the name is a misnomer, as he never directly murders anyone and his intentions are for his victims to survive with a better appreciation of life. A series of flashbacks of his previous victims is presented, including his only known survivor up to that point, a highly traumatized heroin addict named Amanda Young (Shawnee Smith). She believes that her experience in the test has made her a better person in the end.
As Adam and Lawrence search for alternative escape routes, Zep Hindle (Michael Emerson) breaks into the Gordon house and captures Lawrence's wife, Alison (Monica Potter), and daughter Diana Makenzie Vega in order to save himself from a deadly poison. A flashback reveals that Zep is an orderly at Lawrence's hospital who was present when he was talking with some students about an elderly patient, John Kramer, who had terminal brain cancer. While psychologically toying with Alison and Diana, Zep monitors Adam and Lawrence through video surveillance.
Simultaneously, the house is being observed by Detective David Tapp Danny Glover]. Tapp grew unhealthily obsessed with the Jigsaw case after hearing Amanda's testimony, and, following a lead, he and his partner, Steven Sing (Ken Leung), illegally broke into a warehouse that turned out to be one of Jigsaw's lairs, where they saved a man from being killed by drills. Before they could secure Jigsaw's arrest, however, Sing was gunned down by a booby trap, and Jigsaw escaped. Tapp was later dismissed from the police force and is now stalking Lawrence, convinced from planted evidence that he is the Jigsaw Killer.
Meanwhile, in the bathroom, Lawrence finds a cell phone that can only receive calls. He and Adam try to stage Adam's death, but a strong electric shock through the latter's ankle chain foils this plan. Following these events, Adam and Lawrence recall their abductions; they were both ambushed and knocked unconscious by a stranger wearing a pig mask. Lawrence receives a call from Alison, who warns him that Adam knows more than he is telling. Adam explains that he had been paid by Tapp to trail and photograph Lawrence and shows him a pile of photographs that he found with the hacksaws. Lawrence begins to berate Adam, but grows defensive when Adam shows Lawrence evidence that he has been cheating on his wife. The two begin arguing, but are distracted when Adam notices a picture of Zep in Lawrence's house. They deduce that Zep is their abductor. Just as this realization is made, however, Adam points out that it is six o'clock, the deadline.
Allison frees herself from Zep, and a struggle ensues. Gunshots are fired, atracting the attention of Tapp, who distracts Zep long enough for Alison and her daughter to flee. Zep shoots Tapp fatally and races to the sewers, intent on killing Lawrence, who is only aware of the sounds of gunfire and screaming. Unable to reach the phone and desperate to help his family, he uses his hacksaw to cut off his foot and shoots Adam with the corpse's revolver, using a bullet that had been enclosed with his microcassette. Zep arrives to find Lawrence in tears. Before Zep can kill him, however, Adam springs from the floor, as his wound was in fact nonfatal, and beats Zep to death with a toilet tank cover. Lawrence slowly crawls away, promising to get help and return for Adam.
Adam searches Zep's body for a key, but finds another microcassette player. As the series theme, "Hello Zepp", begins to play, Adam learns that Zep was only a pawn in Jigsaw's game who acted under threat of death. He then hears a moan behind him and turns to see the "corpse" slowly get to its feet, revealing itself as John Kramer, the Jigsaw Killer. John tells Adam that the key to the chain had been in the bathtub in which Adam had awakened when the movie began. The key went down the drain along with the bathwater when Adam, in his frantic thrashing, unplugged the stopper. Adam reaches for Zep's handgun, but John stuns him with another electrical shock from his hidden remote control. John flicks off the lights and muses, "Game over!" before slamming the door, sealing Adam in the bathroom.
Soundtrack.
"Saw: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack" is the soundtrack for the movie. It was released October 5, 2004 by Warner Bros. Records.
Track listing.
All songs written by Charlie Clouser with Page Hamilton, Danny Lohner, Chas Smith unless otherwise noted.
" (Charlie Clouser with Page Hamilton, Danny Lohner, Chas Smith, Section) – Charlie Clouser
"Saw: Rebirth (Comic)".
"Saw: Rebirth" is a comic book one-shot published by IDW Publishing. It was written by R. Eric Lieb and Kris Oprisko with art by Renato Guedes.
"Jigsaw".
The Jigsaw Killer is a fictional character in the "Saw" movie series. Jigsaw made his debut appearance as the primary antagonist in the first movie of the series, "Saw", and later "Saw II", "III" and "IV". He is played by American actor Tobin Bell.
Billy the Puppet.
Billy is a puppet that has appeared in the "Saw" movies. He was used by the series' primary antagonist John Kramer, the Jigsaw Killer, to communicate with his victims. Although he has never been identified in the actual movies themselves, "Billy" is the name by which he is referred to by writers, directors and members of the cast and crew on documentaries and interviews. The name was given to him by his real-life creator James Wan, who is the director and co-writer of "Saw". There is disagreement that the name is spelled "Billie", although Wan himself spells it "Billy".
The main purpose of Billy is to deliver recorded messages to victims of Jigsaw's, often appearing on a television screen to distribute the details of the sadistic traps and the means of which the victims can survive.
Recently, a line of replica "Billy" dolls has been released for consumer purchase, mainly through off-beat gift-stores. It retains the main characteristics of the doll, though is much cleaner in appearance. "Billy" Halloween masks have also been released for general consumer purchase.
"Amanda Young".
"Amanda Young" is a fictional character in the "Saw" movie series. She is portrayed by Shawnee Smith. At first a minor character in the original movie, her role expanded in the sequels until she became one of the most important characters in the series.
Pig mask.
The "pig mask" is a thematic prop worn by characters throughout the series.
Adam.
"Adam Faulkner" was a fictional character from the Saw movie series, portrayed by "Saw" writer and co-creator Leigh Whannell. He was prominently featured in "Saw", but was also seen through various flashbacks throughout the series.
Kerry.
"Allison Kerry" is a fictional character in the Saw movie series. SHe playes the roll of the main female detective in "Saw" movies 1-3. She was captured and set in a trap called the "Angel Trap" in the movie "Saw 3".
"Saw".
Most of the first movie played out in a bathroom, the setting of one of Jigsaw's more complicated tests. However, several more of Jigsaw's inventions were seen via flashbacks from crime scene investigators and surviving victims. Additionally, more of Jigsaw's creations were discovered at his lair, located in an abandoned mannequin factory on Stygian Street. Detectives arrived to investigate and discovered several prototypes of traps, including a diorama of the bathroom, Billy the puppet, and a victim who was to be used as part of an experiment.
Razor wire maze.
Paul Stallberg woke up partially naked inside a fenced-in area of a basement, and was told that the only means of escape was a door that was set to lock closed in two hours. Between him and the door was a gauntlet of densely strung together barbed tape through which he was instructed to navigate to survive. According to Jigsaw, the irony of his situation was the fact that he had slit his wrists, presumably for attention, a month ago, and that if he really wanted to die, he needed simply stay where he was (as the door to freedom would close, trapping him in), but if he wanted to live, he would have to "cut himself again". Footage from the movie showed him frantically tearing through the maze. However, he was too late and was later found by detectives Tapp, Sing, and Kerry, dead on the wires.
Flammable jelly.
Mark Rodriguez, a man who had committed worker's comp fraud, was tested on his "illness" and placed in a dark room, with a candle and a box of matches serving as his only light source. Broken glass completely covered the floor, hundreds of numbers were written on the walls, and a safe was placed in the middle of the room. From a tape recorder resting on a small metal platform suspended from the ceiling, Mark, who had been stripped naked, was informed that he was covered with a flammable substance and that there was a slow-acting poison in his system that would kill him in roughly two hours. The combination to the safe, which held the antidote, was written on the walls amidst the myriad of other possibilities. While looking for the combination, Mark drew too close to the candle and went up in flames.
Jaw splitter====.
The Jaw Splitter is an iconic trap, to the extent that it was used on promotional posters for the first movie and on "Saw" merchandise.
The wrists of a heroin addict named Amanda Young were bound with duct tape to the armrests of a chair, and a heavy metal apparatus was hooked up into her upper and lower jaws. Jigsaw, through his puppet on the tape recording, revealed to Amanda that she would have one minute to remove the contraption before it snapped open, much like "a reverse bear trap" (the term "Reverse Bear Trap", referenced in Amanda's instructions, gained fame as a fan name for the trap). The mechanism would rip her jaws open in the process, killing her. To emphasize the point, a demonstration was shown to Amanda, who watched as the device went off on a mannequin head, effectively destroying it. Jigsaw told her that the key needed to unlock the contraption was in the stomach of the dead man lying across the room from her.
As the tape ended, Amanda wriggled her arms free from the duct tape, at which point she stood up, pulling and snapping a trigger wire that set off the one-minute timer on the back of the contraption on her head. Frightened, she slowly tiptoed over to her cell mate, whereupon she had to cut into his stomach and retrieve the key, even after discovering that he was not actually dead as suggested, but in an opiate-induced state of paralysis, unable to move or feel pain. As she was about to cut him open, he woke up. After stabbing him multiple times, Amanda sifted through his stomach and retrieved the key. She then managed to remove the device just in time, throwing it onto the floor just as it snapped open.
The Jaw Splitter would later be seen in Jigsaw's lair in the third movie, again on a mannequin head, where it was examined and set off by Lynn Denlon. Additionally, it was seen in ', in which Jigsaw tested a prototype version of it, and in the original movie, where it was used on a character named David. The scenario played out the same as the later version, with David escaping from the contraption seconds before it went off.
Drill chair.
Jeff's neck was shackled into a metal brace, keeping him trapped in a chair, attached the sides of which were two power drills. The drills were designed to inch toward his head, reaching and killing him in twenty seconds. The trap was activated when Jigsaw decided to test detectives David Tapp and Steven Sing, to see whether they prioritized saving a man's life over arresting him. After ripping apart the circuitry to prevent the detectives from stopping the drills with the button that started them, Jigsaw told Sing to find the key to release Jeff in a box near the chair. Inside the box was a ring with countless keys on it, and, rather than sift through them, Sing instead shot at both drills, deactivating them moments before they reached Jeff's head.
Quadruple shotgun hallway.
This trap was used by Jigsaw for security reasons instead of having a test for the victim. Four double-barreled shotguns were suspended from a ceiling in a hallway, each connected by a tripwire strung across the hallway below. When the victim stepped across the tripwire, which was hidden among cobwebs, it would pull the triggers of the shotguns. The four shotguns would go off simultaneously, firing at the victim and shooting them down. In this case, the victim was Detective Steven Sing, who was chasing Jigsaw through his warehouse in an attempt to capture him.
According to the "Saw" commentary and different interviews, the creators wanted a trap that consisted of two devices that would spring from the walls, snap shut on Sing, and fold him up into a box. They described it as an "iron cocoon." They decided against the idea, as the visual effects would have been too expensive to create.
Bathroom trap.
The setting for the majority of the first movie, this test placed two victims, Adam Faulkner and Dr. Lawrence Gordon, in a grimy industrial washroom. Both were shackled at the ankle to pipes at opposite corners of the room. The pipes were connected to a remote electrical source, which could conduct through the metal chains and shackles to shock the captives. In the middle of the bathroom lay Jigsaw, posing as the corpse of a previous victim, sprawled face down in a pool of poisoned blood, holding an empty pistol in one hand and an empty tape player in the other, just out of reach of Adam and Lawrence. Adam and Lawrence found envelopes with tapes to play to learn their rules, while Lawrence also received a key and a bullet. Following clues from their tapes, Adam found a garbage bag in a toilet, filled with photos he had taken of Lawrence while stalking him under hire, as well as a pair of hacksaws that were not intended to cut through the chains, but were rather meant for the victims to use to cut off their feet in order to escape. Lawrence was told to kill Adam in eight hours, under the threat of death for his wife Alison and daughter Diana, both of whom were being held captive. Adam was simply told to escape, with the only apparent means being the hacksaw, which he broke trying to cut through his chain, and a key that went down the drain of the bathtub that Adam had unknowingly drained after waking up in the water. "Saw III" revealed that Amanda had tied the chain to the bathtub stopper to Adam's ankle without being told to by Jigsaw.
Following more clues, Lawrence found a box in the wall next to him, and was then supplied with a cellphone that could only receive calls, two cigarettes, and a lighter. With the cigarettes, Lawrence found a note from Jigsaw informing him that he did not need a gun to kill Adam, leading Lawrence to assume he could dip the tip of a cigarette in the poisoned blood that the corpse was lying in before giving it to Adam. Not willing to kill Adam, Lawrence attempted to fake it by dipping one of the cigarettes in the blood before swapping it with the untainted one. Adam went along with the game, pretending to die, but the act was blown when Adam was remotely electrically shocked through his chain. At 6 o'clock, Lawrence received a call from his wife. He became desperate as he had heard a struggle on the other end of the phone (his wife freeing herself and their daughter, escaping), but the phone had hung up, and he accidentally threw the phone out of reach. He therefore used his hacksaw to cut his foot off before grabbing the gun from the corpse and shot Adam, too late, since it was past 6 o'clock. Later it was revealed that Adam was not fatally wounded, since he was only shot in his shoulder.
As Lawrence was lying on the floor, crying for what he had done, Zep entered the bathroom. His job was to shoot Lawrence. But Adam, having only pretended he was dead, knocked Zep over to the floor and bashed him with the lid from the toilet until Zep was no longer moving. Lawrence crawled over to Adam and promised to get help before crawling out of the room. Adam, however, remained trapped. Jigsaw then stood up, turned off the lights, and slammed the door, leaving Adam locked in the bathroom. His corpse was found in the bathroom, which was part of the house of "Saw II". In "Saw III", it was revealed that Adam did not in fact die of blood loss from his shoulder wound after being locked away, but by suffocation. Amanda, against Jigsaw's orders, held a strip of plastic wrap over his head, suffocating him in a mercy kill.
Zep's test.
Some time before placing Lawrence and Adam in the Bathroom Trap, Jigsaw arranged for Zep Hindle, a hospital orderly, to become involved in a game of his own; in order to obtain the antidote to a slow-acting poison in his blood, Zep would have to monitor the events of the bathroom trap while holding Alison and Diana hostage in their own home. Zep's rules were to kill Alison and Diana if Lawrence failed to kill Adam in time.
Zep hid in Diana's closet and waited for her father, Lawrence Gordon, to leave before grabbing Diana and her mother and tying them up. With a gun at his disposal, Zep taunted the two hostages while monitoring Lawrence and Adam through a computer screen. When 6 o'clock finally came around, Zep forced Alison, Lawrence's wife, to make the call to tell him he failed, but when Zep was about to shoot her, Alison, who had untied herself, fought back, managing to escape with Diana. With Detective Tapp in pursuit, Zep left the house and drove to an entrance into the sewer system. After fatally shooting the detective, he arrived at the bathroom, and told Lawrence that he was too late in completing his instructions. Before he shot Lawrence, though, Adam, thought to be dead, pulled Zep to the floor and beat him to death with the toilet tank cover. After Lawrence left to find help, Adam looked through Zep's pockets, hoping to find a key to his chain. He instead found a tape recorder and played back the message, finally realizing that Zep had been acting under a threat of death. He stopped the tape before the specifics of Zep's tape could be heard. The reason why Zep was forced to take part in one of Jigsaw's tests is unknown.
Saw: The Video Game.
"Saw" is a upcoming action, horror video game being developed by Brash, for the Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and PC.
Saw (Short Film).
The movie begins with a young man named David (Whannell) in an interrogation room talking to an unnamed, unsympathetic police officer. David is in handcuffs, and there is blood on his face and shirt. David is smoking a cigarette. He tells the officer that after he finished his work as an orderly at the hospital, he was knocked unconscious and taken to a large room. Inside the room, David was strapped to a chair with a large, rusty metal device locked onto his head.
Saw II.
"Saw II" movie is currently #16 on Bravo's Even Scarier Movie Moments. Following the film's opening weekend gross of $31.5 million, Lions Gate Films commissioned "Saw III", released on October 27, 2006.
Saw III.
"Saw III" is the third installment in the "Saw" series. The movie is a joint effort of both "Saw" writers/directors, James Wan and Leigh Whannell, and "Saw II" writer/director, Darren Lynn Bousman. The movie focuses on the resurfaced Jigsaw Killer, the antagonist of the previous movies, who works with his unstable apprentice Amanda to finish his final tests before he dies. The movie contains additional back-story about the two antagonists.
Saw IV.
"Saw IV" is the fourth installment in the Saw movie series. The movie was initially released on October 25, 2007, and in the United States on October 26, 2007. The film's North American release date follows the series' tradition that the movies be released the Friday before or on halloween of each year.
Saw V.
"Saw V" is the upcoming fifth installment in the Saw movie series. The movie is set to be released on October 24, 2008.
Saw VI.
Costas Mandylor has signed up for the next installment of the horror franchise along with main character, Jigsaw, portrayed by Tobin Bell. This movie is planed to be released as the 6th in the horror series of "Saw" in October of 2009.
