Super Mario Galaxy is a video game by Nintendo. The game is for the Wii. "Super Mario Galaxy" is very different from older Mario games, and has some new gameplay in it.
Story.
Bowser has captured Princess Peach again, this time using a surprise attack over the so-called Mushroom Kingdom, with a battle fleet of flying boats by pulling the castle out of its foundation. Mario barely grasps onto the dug out piece of Earth, but is knocked off by one of Bowser's allies. He drifts out into intergalactic space, unconscious.
After waking up on a peculiar planet, Mario finds a playful star like creature, named a Luma and he must play hide and seek with the Luma and his friends to gain information about where he is. After succesfully capturing all Lumas, the first Luma leads Mario up to a podium, where a beautiful woman in blue robes stands waiting. The woman is named Rosalina and she moves around space by using her mobile Observatory. It was her who gave the name 'Luma', after finding the first Luma, named 'Luma'. According to her story, one day she finds Luma stranded on Earth; this is the first time for her meeting Luma. She says that the observatory after Bowser stole its Grand Stars, which give the observatory its power.
Mario must follow Bowser all the way out into outer space, find power stars and Grand Stars, defeat him, and rescue Peach with help of Lumas, launch stars, natives of different kinds of galaxies, and the Toad Brigade, a group of Toads.
The game play is very similar to "Super Mario 64" with special moves done with the Wii Remote.
Gameplay.
In Super Mario Galaxy, Mario can do a Star Spin attack, and can jump from planet to planet. The creator of the Mario games, Shigeru Miyamoto, is the director of this game, and gave Mario moves he has never had before.
Features.
Like the shines of "Super Mario Sunshine" or the stars of "Super Mario 64", "Galaxy" has things called star bits. They may be used to progress in certain parts of the game, or they can be used to stun enemies. Mario can collect star bits using the Wii Remote, simply by pointing at them. Mario can gain a life if he collects 50 of them.
The coin system has also changed. In the previous two games, every 100 coins collected earned a life, but in "Galaxy" he only needs 50. Also, Mario will not be able to collect 100 coins to get a star in a level; instead, once he defeats Bowser for the last time, the player can choose to return to a level, select the "Purple Comet" star, and can try to collect 100 purple coins (not normal coins) to earn a star.
