Saleisha Stowers is the winner of the 9th season of America's Next Top Model, a model competition on 2007. She is born on January 10, 1986 and is now a model at a company called Elite Model Management. Stowers also won CoverGirl cosmetics worth $100 000 and a cover on a magazine called Seventeen.
Before" America's Next Top Model".
Stowers really worked at a service counter. She joined a camp by model Tyra Banks called T-Zone because she had no confidence in herself. After the camp, she had more confidence and became more happy as a person. Stowers appeared in the 6th season of the competition as a minor model with a 1-second appearance. She also appeared as a model on Tyra Banks' show.
"America's Next Top Model".
Stowers joined the 9th season of America's Next Top Model and became one of the 13 girls to become contestants. She was nearly out when in the bottom two with contestant Victoria Marshman. Her happy personality made her popular among the girls, and she made a best friend, Chantal Jones.
Stowers was No. 1 for two times, which helped her become better in Tyra Banks's eyes. Stowers was called short and fat by one of the girls, Bianca Golden, and when she was helped by Jones, it made the two's friendship even better. Stowers however was too happy-go-lucky to do serious-looks, and landed in the bottom two again, this time with Jenah Doucette. She however had called Doucette lousy in front of the judges, and as they believed her, Doucette was kicked out instead of her. Stowers joined the final catwalk show with Chantal. The two best friends helped each other, and in the final judging time, Stowers was named the winner.
Controversy.
Stowers was called bad things in the discussion website of America's Next Top Model. She was even said to have slept with one of the judges Nigel Barker in order to win. However, these are all untrue as those who have said that are in truth angry with Stowers winning the competition.
Stowers really knew Tyra Banks, making people think it is unfair to the other girls. Stowers also appeared in an advertisement before, and the rule states that contestants must not have appeared in advertisements in the 5 years.
Trivia.
Stowers' new hair in the competition has made people think she looks like Dora the Explorer, but it is really created from Louis Brooks's hairstyle.
