"StarCraft" is a real-time strategy game for the PC. It was created in 1998 by Blizzard Entertainment.
Plot.
The story is set in the future, where humans (called "Terrans") get stuck in a war between two alien species, the "Zerg" and the "Protoss". The Zerg look like monsters, and are all controlled by a very powerful Zerg called the "Overmind". They fly around the universe and invade planets. The Protoss, who have very advanced technology, look for the planets that the Zerg have taken over. When they find a Zerg planet, they burn it so that the Zerg on that planet cannot spread to others.
Gameplay.
"StarCraft" players can choose to be the Protoss, Zerg, or Terran. Each race has different soldiers and buildings. Players can choose one-player or multiplayer games. In both, the player must build a base, gather resources, and make fighters to attack the enemy.
In one-player mode, there is the Campaign mode, and Custom mode. In Campaign mode, the player goes through missions, which tells the story. Custom mode lets a player choose what race they want to be, what area they want to play on, and what race they will fight against, and all enemies are controlled by the computer.
The most popular mode of the game is multiplayer (two to eight players), which takes place on Battle.net.
During a game, the player must use units to gather minerals and vespene gas. Each type of unit costs a certain amount of these resources. If the player does not have enough gas and minerals, he or she cannot build more units. Also, there is a limit, 200 units, to make the game more exciting. Resources are gathered by by worker units. Minerals are needed for all units and buildings, and come as blue crystals from the ground. Vespene gas is needed for stronger units and comes as a geyser with green smoke blowing out of it. A special building must be built on these geysers before worker units can gather the gas.
There are many different buildings in the game. Some buildings let the player build units, and other buildings can make units stronger, or do research to let more powerful units be built. Every units needs something called 'supply', which is gotten by buildings or units that are different in each species. Players need to have supply, because if they do not they cannot build any more units. No player can have more than two hundred supply, so they can only build a certain number of units.
Each species has very different types of units. The Protoss have powerful warriors and machinery, which cost a lot, and the Zerg use many fast, cheap units to defeat their enemies. The Terran are a middle between these, having strong but easy to kill units that are very powerful when they are used in formation. No species in "StarCraft" is more powerful than another species. Blizzard has released many small updates to the game that keep all the species balanced.
To win, players must capture and use resources wisely, and use smart strategies. To become very skilled at the game, players also need to become good at micromanagement and macromanagement all at the same time. Macromanagement means building new bases and collecting resources. Micromanagement means moving units so that they can use their special powers to protect each other, and doing many small things to make the fight go smoothly. This makes "StarCraft" different from many newer games, because the newer games often will do much of the micromanagement without the player having to do it.
"Starcraft" is 11 years old, but still played by many people, in many countries around the world. It is very popular in countries like Korea and the United States.
On May 19, 2007 Blizzard said that they are making StarCraft II. Also, they have held some events for South Korean Starcraft pro-gamers to participate and give them assist about the game.
