The Republic of Singapore or Singapore is a country in the continent of Asia at the southern end of the Malay peninsula. Singapore is north of the equator. Its neighbours are Malaysia and Indonesia. About 6.71 million people live in Singapore, and many of them (76%) are Chinese. In Sanskrit, an old Indian language, "Singapore" means "Lion city". The national language of Singapore is Malay and the other official languages of Singapore are English, Mandarin and Tamil. Singapore is also known for a language known as Singlish, or Singaporean English.
English is the language of choice because it is the First Language taught in schools. Pupils are also taught their mother tongue language, which means that the Chinese can learn Mandarin, the Malays can learn Malay, and so on. Third languages are also taught.
History.
Singapore got its name from 'Singa Pura' which means Lion City. There are many versions of how the name is derived. One popular (famous) legend has it that an Sumatran prince called Sang Nila Utama landed on Temasek (Singapore's old name) and saw a Lion which is called 'Singa' in Malay. Thus he gave the island a new name, 'Singapura'.
Singapore was set up as a British trading town in 1819 by Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, and became an important town in the Malay Archipelago, and became "Singapore". The country was given colony rank in 1867. The Japanese attacked Singapore in late 1941, and took control of the colony on 15 February 1942 and renamed it Syonan-to (pronounced as Sho-nan-to), meaning Light of the South, during the rule. People of Singapore went through hard times during the Japanese rule until the surrender in September 1945 back to the British. The hard times during the World War II made the people think that the British were not as powerful as before.
In 1963 Singapore joined with Malaya, Sabah and Sarawak to form the new nation of Malaysia. Malaysia is a country with many races. Among the races, the Malays have special benefits. For example, the Malays can get university education more easily than other races. Most people in Singapore are Chinese. Singapore wanted equality (equal treatment/fairness) for all the people of Malaysia. This caused arguments (quarrels) between the state government of Singapore and the federal government of Malaysia. Singapore separated from Malaysia and became independent (on its own) on August 9 1965.
At first, many people thought Singapore would not be able to survive (live) on its own. However, the people of Singapore wanted to make their new country better. Today, Singapore is doing very well economically.
World War II.
During World War II, Singapore was also badly affected. Many people died because of the weak defences of the country. In the end, the British decided to surrender to the Japanese on 15 February, 1942 at the Ford Motor Factory. When the Japanese took over Singapore, it was called Syonan-to.
Climate.
Singapore is hot and wet all year round. It has a tropical climate, which means there are no spring, summer, autumn and winter in Singapore. There is usually the most rain at the end of the year, and the temperature is usually around 22 °C to 34 °C.
Holidays.
There are also school holidays, lasting one week in March and September, about one month in June, and about one and a half months in December.
Money.
Singapore's currency is the Singapore dollar. The short name for the Singapore dollar is SGD. Brunei dollar can be used in Singapore, because they have the same value. There are also many money changers in Singapore.
Transportation.
There are buses, trains, and taxis in Singapore.
Singapore has a railway system known as the Mass Rapid Transit (Singapore), or MRT in short. There are also taxi companies like Comfort Cabs, Silver Cab, SMRT Taxis, CityCab and Premier Taxi. The Singaporean transport system is controlled by the LTA (Land Transport Authority).
