Stingrays are a form of sea creature. There are 70 kinds of stingrays in the world. Most types of stingrays live in saltwater (sea), close to land, in warm parts of the world. A small number live in freshwater (lakes and rivers).
Stingrays are a part of the Ray family of fishes. They are flat and push themselves through water by moving their bodies up and down in a wave motion. Stingrays have no bones. Rays are something like flattened sharks. They, like sharks, have something called cartilage. Cartilage is like what is hard on the tip of your nose.
Some stingrays are smaller than your hand and some are as big as an adult man.
Stingrays have a tail with "Stingers" - sharp points that are covered in poison. A Stingray cut causes pain for humans but death is very rare. The stinger on the tail of the stingray can be bigger than a man!
Stingrays like to eat meat. They love to eat clams and shrimp that live on the ocean floor. Their eyes are on top of its body so they cannot see their food. They use special electrical messages from animals and what they smell to find food. Then they use their strong teeth to smash the shells of the animals to get to the meat inside.
Most fish lay eggs in the water, but stingrays do not. They give birth to baby stingrays. Lady stingrays give birth once a year to two to ten babies(1). Baby stingrays, called pups, are born after two to four months. They are born with sharp spines in their tails. The sharp spines help them stay safe.
Stingrays sometimes get little animals stuck on them and this can make them sick. A little fish helps the stingrays by eating the little animals that get stuck on them for its supper.
Stingrays do not have homes; their body can keep them safe and comfy on the ocean floor. Their flat bodies let them hide in sand or mud. Most stingrays are greenish or brownish so they can hide in sand or mud. Stingrays that live in coral reefs with nice colors have nice colors too.
Stingrays have to stay safe mostly from sharks that like to eat them. Their sharp tail can keep them safe from many animals. If a stingray is stepped on, its sharp tail can really hurt. Stingrays do not usually hurt other animals. When they are scared they usually swim away.
In the world of the baseball, they are the former name of the Tampa Bay Rays. From the team's inception in 1998 up until November 2007 the team was known as the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, when the team changed name they also changed their uniforms. On the new uniforms on one of the sleeves is a sting ray symbol, retaining some heritage to the old name. Also, in left field of the Rays' stadium (Tropicana Field) is a fish tank containing some Cownose rays. The tank is maintained by the Florida Aquarium.
1 - Gross, Miriam J., The Stingray, PowerKids Press, New York, 2006
