Sikkim is Republic of India's smallest state in terms of population and second smallest in area after Goa and has an area of 2,745 sq mi (7,110 km²), it is bigger than Palestinian territories but smaller than the Georgian territory of Abkhazia. It is the shrine of the third highest mountain in the world i.e. Mt. Kanchendzonga (28,208 Ft asl). Its capital is Gangtok and other major towns are Gayzing, Pelling, Yuksam and Jorethang. The Languages spoken are English, Sikkimese, Lepcha, Tibettan, Nepali and Hindi. The main source of revenue has been tourism for this small state of India being landlocked on all sides. It shares its border with Bhutan to the east, Nepal to its west, Tibet to the north and Indian mainlands to its south.
Long isolated from the outside world, Sikkim was settled by Tibetans in the 16th century and became a British protectorate in 1890. Sikkim passed to India in 1949 and became a state of that country in 1975.
Sikkim's people are predominantly of Nepalese extraction; the minority Bhotias (Tibetan in origin) and aboriginal Lepchas are mainly pastoral nomads. Although the Nepalese practice Hinduism, Buddhism was professed by the former chogyal (“king under the religious laws”) and the official class, and Sikkim is noted for its Buddhist monasteries. Tibeto-Burmese languages and dialects are spoken widely.
Physical Features.
Sikkim may be small in area, may be only second smallest after Goa, but it has rich physical features like forests, rivers and mountains that define its boundaries. Most of the peaks above 6100 meters (2000ft) lie towards the western border of State. On the western border lies the third highest mountain of the world - the Kanchendzonga 8588 meters (28168 ft). Other peaks that stand at altitudes of above 6100 meters (20000ft) are Kabru, which is also the second highest mountain in the state. Sinilchu, Pandim, Rothong, Kokthang, Talung, Kanglakhang, Simvo & Jonsang. On the eastern border the most imposing peak is Paunhri, at an altitude of about 6700 meters(22000ft). The other mountains that are slightly less than 6100 meters (20000ft) are Masthonangye, Yabukjakchen, Narsing and Lamaonden.
Most of the peaks of Sikkim have remained unscaled because the Sikkimese consider them sacred and feel that they will lose their sanctity if climbed.
Lakes.
On the way between Gangtok to Nathula, 35 Kilometers from Gangtok lies the serene Changu (Tsomgo) Lake at an altitude of about 3693 meters (12310 ftp). Two other lakes nearby are the Bidang cho and the Mememcho. Kechopari lake is another well-known lake that lies on the route between Gyalshing and Yoksum. The highest concentration of lakes is on the western border north of Chiwabhanjang towards the Base Camp. Laxmipokhari, Lampokhari, Majurpokhari, twin lakes of Ram-Laxman are a few of the lakes in this area. Dud Phokhari and Samiti Lake are two other lakes situated in this area. Gurudogmar, which is the largest lakes and are in North Sikkim.
Hot Springs.
Sikkim has many hot-springs known for medicinal and therapeutic values. The most important hot-springs are at Phurchachu(Reshi), Yumthang, Borang, Ralang, Taram-chu and Yumey Samdong. All these hotsprings have high sulphur content and are located near the river banks. The average temperature of the water in these hot springs is 50°C.
Foods and Drinks.
Sikkimese prefer rice, green vegetables, potatoes, dals, sinky (Nepali delicacy), Gundruk (Nepali delicacy), Kenama (Nepali delicacy) etc.
