Skiing is a sport that takes place on slopes of snow. There are two different types of skiing, down hill skiing and cross country skiing. A group of people have now made skiing a year round sport by building a ski hill indoors.
Downhill Skiing.
Downhill Skiing is a fun sport that anyone can learn at any age. It is best, thought, to start around 4 to 5 years old. There are now 5 different difficulties of hills marked. There are in order of difficulty, from easiest to hardest. "Green Circles", "Blue Squares", "Black Diamonds", "Double Black Diamonds", and "EX Terrain".
Green Circles.
Green Circles are the easiest run, they have a very shallow slope, have no moguls (bumps on the trail), are very wide, and are easily accessed. They are used by the beginner skiers to learn, and are fun for the more experienced skier because there are usually small jumps on the sides of there trails.
Blue Squares.
Blue Square terrain is a bit more difficult, and has a larger range of difficulty. There are easy blues, which are the same as the Green runs, but are a bit steeper. And there are the challenging blues. They can have moguls, and can still be steep. They are usually located on not as wide trails, and may be further up the mountain, requiring harder trails to access them. But one can usually find and get on a Blue run easily.
Black Diamonds.
Black Diamonds are runs for semi-experienced riders, one should not try to tackle a Black Diamond until he or she is comfortable with their skiing skills. You should easily be able to accomplish a harder Blue run before moving on to a Black diamond. This terrain is steep, may have larger obstacle such as rocks or trees in the skiers path, and can be very steep and still have moguls. Another form of a Black run is a Glade. A Glade is a run where you ski through the trees. Most Glades that are black are marked, and one should be careful entering them, they require quick thinking and fast turning. They are very dangerous, one can be killed in a Glade if he or she is not careful, so they are not a joke, you should have a lot of experience before entering a Glade.
Double Black Diamonds.
Double Black diamonds are for expert skiers only. They may have unmarked obstacles may be very thin runs, and may have to be accessed by hiking to the top of the hill. These runs have the potential to kill a skier if he or she is not careful.
EX Terrain.
This terrain may have cliffs, and is for only for experts. Trying this run could easily result in death.
Cross Country Skiing.
Cross Country Skiing is a sport of endurance, skiers ride across an almost flat track, usually through a scenic forest or town. It is a very good source of exercise and requires extreme diligence. It is a GREAT workout if one is willing to put in the effort.
