A Smiley (also called a "smiley face" and an "emoticon") is a picture of a simple smiling face that is used to show emotion. The first smileys to be widely used were made as yellow buttons, but now the most common smileys are made using computer keyboard symbols. Smileys are used by many people in emails and other types of computer messages. A "smiley" is also sometimes spelt wrongly as "smily" or "smilie".
Smiley button.
The idea of the "smiley" first came from David Stern of an advertising agency called David Stern Inc.. Stern designed the "smiley" in 1967 as part of an advertising campaign for Washington Mutual. The "smiley" was a bright yellow circle representing a face, with black oval eyes and a big curved mouth with smile creases at the ends.
The design was made popular in the early 1970s by a pair of brothers, Murray and Bernard Spain, who though of a great plan to sell novelty items. The two used the "smiley face" on buttons as well to decorate coffee mugs, t-shirts, bumper stickers and many other things. They also used the phrase "Have a happy day" (which was the idea of Gyula Bogar). "Smiley" buttons were very popular from the 1970s onwards.
Smileyworld Ltd.
Smiley is a brand developed by Franklin Loufrani since 1971. He controls Smileyworld Ltd, a company whose mission is to make the world a happier place to live. Its brand Smiley is sold all over the world in several lifestyle industries, its designers are constantly developing very creative and edgy products, and they can be seen on and
The brand is using organic cotton in order to help protect the environment and the lives of people involved in its production. 10% of the royalties collected are donated to a charity called the Smiley World Association, active with social actions in several countries. Its baseline is Share your smile with those in need.
In 1997 Franklin's son Nicolas Loufrani has started to create a new world with icons based on the original Smiley logo. Today over 1200 icons are used as part of a brand called This brand is based on a communication concept aimed at helping people to communicate better through various social expression products (greeting cards, gifts...). It is also an educative project with books, toys, interactive products as well as a very fun lifestyle brand for kids (fashion, accessories...)
Legal.
Smiley has been a registered trademark since 1971. The Smiley name and logo now registered and used in over 100 countries for 25 classes of goods and services. More than 1200 Smiley emoticons are registered with the Washington Library of Congress and protected by the Universal Copyrights Convention. In the past 10 years, has signed more than 800 licensing contracts worldwide and has been using its rights in most classes of goods and services in all important countries on the 5 continents. Smileyworld Ltd works with over 60 law firms to protect its IP.
Emoticon.
In the 1990s people started using the internet and emails as a regular way of communicating. So that they could show happiness or fun in an easy way, people started making little smiling faces using some of the symbols on the keyboard. A keyboard smiley has a colon ":" for the eyes, a hyphen "-" for the nose, and a parenthesis ")" for the mouth. Some people make the smiley without the hyphen for a nose. The "smileys" that are made in this way are sideways.
When you tilt your head to the left, it looks like a smiling face.
Smileys are usually used as part of a written message, but sometimes a smiley is just sent on its own to say "I am happy with your last message." Smileys are a useful way to show feelings to someone who cannot see the face of person sending the message.
Some people use different symbols, or do not use a nose, etc.
