Stone Temple Pilots (often called STP) is an American rock band that played in the 1990s and early 2000s. They broke up in 2003 but reformed in 2008. The band has Scott Weiland (vocals), brothers Robert (bass guitar, vocals) and Dean DeLeo (guitar), and Eric Kretz (drums, percussion). The band's five albums have sold more than 17.5 million in the United States alone and more than 30 million albums worldwide. The band had fifteen top ten singles, or songs sold on their own, on the Billboard rock charts, including six #1's, and one #1 album on the pop charts (1994's "Purple"). In 1994, the band won a Grammy for "Best Hard Rock Performance" for their song "Plush". Stone Temple Pilots were also ranked at #40 by VH1 on the 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock list.
The band released the greatest-hits album "Thank You" in 2003. The band then fell apart. Since the band's end, Weiland moved on to become the frontman of Velvet Revolver with former members of Guns N' Roses. The DeLeo brothers started the band Army of Anyone with Richard Patrick from the band Filter. Army of Anyone released its first album in 2006, which was also called "Army of Anyone". Kretz started Bomb Shelter Studios in Los Angeles.
In 2008, Stone Temple Pilots reformed. They went on a concert tour that began on May 1 and ended on October 30. In a short time, they will return to the studio to record a seventh album.
History.
Scott Weiland and Robert DeLeo met during a concert. They formed a band with two of Scott's friends from Edison High School, Corey Hicock (guitar) and David Allen (drums). They then named their band "Mighty Joe Young" and recorded a demo tape that was completed around 1990. During the recording, they got a call from their lawyer who told them that there was a blues man who had already claimed the name Mighty Joe Young. They changed the band's name to Shirley Temple's Pussy and performed under this name for a short time, but then changed the name again due to record label pressure. They decided to use the initials STP and soon used the name Stone Temple Pilots in 1992.
