SuperSWOT is an expanded version of Albert Humphrey's SWOT Analysis. It was developed by Jerry Luftman and Christine Bullen.
SuperSWOT grid.
The SWOT analysis has been used for a long time in strategic analysis (Humphrey, 2004), and has consisted of making a basic listing of factors in the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats categories. The Super SWOT approach improves the basic, simple SWOT by rearranging the four initial categories to create intersecting quadrants.
The SO quadrant - Comparing the Strengths list with the Opportunities list, a series of possible strategies can be generated. The question being asked is how can an organization use its strengths to take advantage of opportunitites. For example, if under strengths there is "strong brand recognition" and under opportunities, there is "new markets opening in China" then there could be a strategy: "Use brand recognition to facilitate entry into new markets in China."
The ST quadrant - Comparing the Strengths list with the Threats list, generate possible strategies that answer the question: how can an organization use its strengths to avoid/defend against threats. An example for an on-line marketplace would be to use the strength of their having an excellent web development staff to defend against the threat of hackers getting into customer accounts.
The WO quadrant - Comparing the Weaknesses list with the Opportunities list, generate possible strategies that answer the question: how can an organization use its opportunities to overcome weaknesses. An example here might be a company that is lacking talent in web design might overcome that weakness by using an opportunity to acquire another organization that has strong web development skills.
The WT quadrant - Compare the Weaknesses and the Threats and develop strategies that both avoid threats and overcome weaknesses. If under weaknesses an organization has "poor performance/low profitability" and under threats it has "competitor potential hostile takeover" then several strategies could be developed: 1) Improve profitability by becoming more efficient (lay off staff, employ technology better...), 2) Seek partnership/merger with stronger firm to guard against hostile takeover.
Two key elements help in creating good strategies: 1) each strategy statement should begin with an action verb (use, acquire, improve, seek); 2) each strategy statement should be as specific as possible.
The Super SWOT approach can be linked to other management approaches to make it even more valuable. The initial generation of the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats can be improved by using existing approaches that help to structure thinking and therefore supply the lists in each basic quadrant.
Strengths and weaknesses are readily derived from using the As-Is/To-Be technique. Opportunities are created using the Ansoff Product/Service Matrix (Ansoff, H.I. 1965. Corporate Strategy: An Analytical Approach to Business Policy for Growth and Expansion. New York: McGraw-Hill). And threats can be derived using the Porter Five Forces approach (Porter, M.E. 1979. How competitive forces shape strategy. Harvard Business Review, March/April - updated in January 2008).
A complete description of Super SWOT and its use in strategic analysis will be forthcoming in "Planning for IS" in the AMIS series (ME Sharpe). A full reference will be provided when this is published.
