Sparta is a city in Greece. It is the capital of the Laconia prefecture. It is located in the south of Peloponnese peninsula. During antiquity it was extremely powerful. Today is a small city. Its population is 16,726 inhabitants according to the 2001 census.
Characteristics.
Sparta was a city-state with a very strong military and a government that was well led. Sparta held a firm military, and was known as one of the strongest city-states in Greece. Only the strongest survived in Sparta, male or female. The Spartans weeded out their young early. Those with flaws were left to die. When a child was killed (as legend says) it was thrown off a cliff.
Customs.
Young Spartans were taken from their homes at the age of seven to begin a military life. The Spartans became soldiers at age 20, citizens at age 30, and retired at age 60. Men trained hard to become warriors of the Spartan army. Women were encouraged to keep healthy so that they could produce healthy, fit babies to grow up to be strong. Spartans saw little moral value in the concept of childbirth; unless the child was fit to become a Spartan, he would die.
Economy.
Sparta had a government with checks and balances. The executive branch was led by two kings. The legislative branch was led by the citizens. and the judicial branch was controlled by the elders. There was also a committee of five men who were in charge of the education process that young boys and girls went through.
History.
Sparta slaved by people of Messenia around 680-560 BC.These slaves later became known as the Helots. Helots spent their lives farming their Spartan masters kleros (Land Granted to Spartan Citizens). At most times the Helots outnumbered their Spartan masters 10 to 1. They rebelled often, although never at any time able to overthrow their oppressors.
Once a Spartan reached the age of 20 he or she would then become a Homoios. A Homoios was a member of the ruling class (a citizen). Both men and women were citizens. Sparta was the leading society for women's rights as women were considered to be equal. The Spartan army used a formation called the phalanx. This made the Spartan front impenetrable. This contributed to the many battles Sparta won.
