"Star Trek" is a science fiction television show.
It was originally created by Gene Roddenberry and first was shown in the U.S. from 1966 to 1969, and inspired five more television series, ten movies, and a range of books, magazines, comic strips and so much more. All the Star Trek stories together are probably longer than any other science fiction series ever produced.
Movies.
There are a lot of written stories about Star Trek, too. But the Paramount Studios does not accept them. So there are small and big things that aren't the same between "official Star Trek" and some of the written Star Trek stories.
Idea of Star Trek.
The idea of "Star Trek" is that after mankind nearly killed itself completely in a World War III (the original stories were written in the time of the Cold War), a man called Zephram Cochrane invented a way to travel with speeds greater than the speed of light ("warp technology"). Because of this invention, mankind has contact with extraterrestrial life. This part of the story (shown in ') takes place in the second half of the 21st century. In the 22nd century mankind, Vulcans and a lot of other species from other planets start the United Federation of Planets, often called just "the Federation". The reason the Vulcans did not make first contact before the invention of warp technology was because the Vulcans did not believe in interfering with the natural evolution of a species. Later, the Federation also adopted this philosophy as their "Prime Directive".
Star Trek: The Original Series.
The original "Star Trek" from 1966 is the story of the starship "Enterprise" (NCC-1701) under the command of Captain James T. Kirk (played by William Shatner) and his half-Human half-Vulcan (alien species) first officer Commander Spock (played by Leonard Nimoy) in the 23rd century.
The "Enterprise" travels through parts of the galaxy, and the crew meets a lot of strange cultures. The main characters (Kirk, Spock, Doctor Leonard McCoy (played by DeForest Kelley, Lt. Uhura and the genius engineer Montgomery Scott, called "Scotty") are often in danger. However, because of Kirk's daring, Spock's intelligence, or Scotty's skill, the crew always survives.
Star Trek: The Next Generation.
More than 20 years after the first series, ' started. The new starship was the "Enterprise D" (NCC-1701-D) under Captain Jean-Luc Picard (played by Patrick Stewart). His first officer Commander William T. Riker (played by Jonathan Frakes), medical doctor Beverly Crusher, chief engineer Geordi La Forge, the android Lt. Cmdr. Data, and Lieutenant Worf, who is Klingon are the main members of the crew. The stories take place in the 24th century.
Enterprise.
A few years later, there was another Star Trek series that was set in the time before the first one: "Enterprise". It often went against what was already known about the world of Star Trek. The main characters are Captain Jonathan Archer, Subcommander T'Pol (a Vulcan woman), communications officer and expert linguistic Ensign Hoshi Sato, engineer Commander Charles "Trip" Tucker III, chief of security Malcolm Reed and Ensign Mayweather.
Themes.
Often "Star Trek" has something to do with the state of the world at the time the stories were filmed. For example, Star Trek VI shows the end of the conflict between the Federation and the Klingon Empire, similar to the end of the Cold War, following a disaster similar to Chernobyl.
