"Stegosaurus" (meaning "roof-lizard") was a type of plant-eating dinosaur which lived in what is now western North America.
"Stegosaurus" lived in the Late Jurassic period around 155 to 145 million years ago. It is among the most easily recognized dinosaurs, due to the distinctive double row of kite-shaped plates on its back and the long spikes on its tail. The armor was necessary as it lived with such meat-eaters as "Allosaurus" and "Ceratosaurus".
Discovery and species.
"Stegosaurus" was originally named by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1877, from fossils found near Morrison, Colorado. These first bones became the first species of Stegosaur named: "Stegosaurus armatus".
Several different "Stegosaurus" species have been found.
Paleobiology.
"Stegosaurus" was the largest stegosaur, reaching up to 12 m (39.4 ft) in length and weighing up to 5,000 kg (5.5 short tons). However, 7 to 9 m was a more usual length.
Skull.
The skull of "Stegosaurus" was long and narrow. Because of its short front legs, its head was close to the ground, probably no higher than 1 m (3.3 ft). It ate low-growing plants because of this. It had no front teeth, but it did have a horn-covered beak. Stegosaurian chewing teeth were small and triangular and did little grinding as they lacked wear surfaces.
Unlike most dinosaurs, it did not have a hole between its nose and eye. Despite "Stegosaurus's size, its brain was small: no larger than that of a dog's.
Nervous system.
It has often been claimed that the brain was the size of a walnut. However, "Stegosaurus" had a brain several times bigger than a walnut. The bundle of nerves near the base of the tail that controlled reflexes in the back of the body was actually larger than the brain.
Posture.
"Stegosaurus" did have very short forelimbs in relation to its hind legs. The back legs each had three short toes, while the front legs had five toes. All four limbs were supported by pads behind the toes.
Classification.
"Stegosaurus" was a member of the Thyreophora, or armored dinosaurs, a family of dinosaurs which includes the ankylosaurs.
Popular culture.
"Stegosaurus" has been declared the State Dinosaur of Colorado. It has also appeared in many movies and TV shows.
