Strychnine ((British, U.S.), or (U.S.)) is a very toxic colorless crystalline alkaloid. It is very poisonous, the LD50 is about 10 mg. Strychnine is soluble in alcohol and chloroform, but not in water.
Strychnine can act as a stimulant, much like caffeine. It is on the list of substances tested for doping in sports.
The substance was used as a pesticide, especially for killing small vertebrates such as birds and rodents. Strychnine causes muscular convulsions. It leads to death through asphixia or exhaustion. The most common source is from the seeds of the "Strychnos nux vomica" tree. Strychnine is one of the most bitter substances known. Its taste is detectable in concentrations as low as 1 ppm.
Poisoning.
Between 30 and 120mg can kill an adult human. Strychnine is rapidly absorbed by Mucous membranes. If its given under the sjkin, or intravenously, a quantity of 15 mg may be enough to kill an adult. Benzodiazepines (such as Diazepam) are used by default for emergency treatmemt.
Unlike the illustrations given in fiction crime novels, Strychnine is not very good for killing somenone (when given orally). This is because even diluted at 1:130.000 it can still be tasted. Despite this, some murders happened with Strychnine. Thomas Neill Cream, a serial killer used it on some of his vixtims.
Pharmacology.
Strychnine acts as a blocker or antagonist at the inhibitory or strychnine-sensitive glycine receptor (GlyR), a ligand-gated chloride channel in the spinal cord and the brain.
Although it is best known as a poison, small doses of strychnine were once used in medications as a stimulant, a laxative and as a treatment for other stomach ailments. A 1934 drug guide for nurses described it as "among the most valuable and widely prescribed drugs". Strychnine's stimulant effects also led to its use historically for enhancing performance in sports. Because of its high toxicity and tendency to cause convulsions, the use of strychnine in medicine was eventually abandoned once safer alternatives became available.
The dosage for medical use was cited as between "1/60th grain–1/10th grain", which is between 1.1 milligrams and 6.4 milligrams in modern measures. Normally the maximum dosage used was 3.2 mg, half of a "full dose". A lethal dose was cited as 1/2 a grain (32 mg), but people have been known to die from as little as 5 mg of strychnine.
