Sogyal Rinpoche is a Tibetan Dzogchen Lama of the Nyingma tradition. He has been teaching for over 30 years. He travels widely in Europe, America, Australia and Asia.
He is the founder and spiritual leader of Rigpa, which is an international network of over 100 Buddhist centres and groups in 23 countries around the world. He is also the author of the best-selling book "The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying", which has been printed in 30 languages and 56 countries.
Rinpoche often speaks at major conferences in all areas of society, including medicine and healing, universities and educational institutions, interfaith dialogue, movements for peace and non-violence, the world of business and leadership, and the field of serving the dying and hospice care.
Early life.
Sogyal Rinpoche was born around 1950 in the region of Kham in Eastern Tibet. Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö says that he is the reincarnation of Tertön Sogyal, a teacher to the Thirteenth Dalai Lama. Jamyang Khyentse raised him as a son and made sure he got good training.
When things got bad in Kham, Khyentse Rinpoche and his young student went to Central Tibet and Lhasa. In 1955, they met Tenzin Gyatso, His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama. They then went to India. They settled in Gangtok at the invitation of the king of Sikkim.
Education.
Rinpoche went to Catholic School in Kalimpong. Then he went to study at a university in Delhi before coming to the West. In 1971, he was granted a place to study comparative religion at Trinity College, Cambridge as a visiting scholar. He continued to study with many masters of all schools of Tibetan Buddhism, especially His Holiness Dudjom Rinpoche and His Holiness Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche.
Teaching career.
Rinpoche soon began teaching in Paris. He often translated for His Holiness Dudjom Rinpoche. He also went with Dudjom Rinpoche to the United States in 1976.
In the summer of 1977, he started a centre in London, which he called Dzogchen Orgyen Chöling. Many great masters taught there: Dudjom Rinpoche, His Holiness Sakya Trizin, Gyalwang Karmapa, Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche and others.
In 1979, Sogyal Rinpoche chose the name Rigpa for his work. It means "the innermost, essential nature of mind".
Criticism.
In 1994, a $10 million civil lawsuit was filed against Sogyal Rinpoche. It was alleged that over a period of many years, Rinpoche had used his position as a spiritual leader to induce some of his female students to have intercourse with him. The complaint included counts of intentional infliction of emotional distress as well as one count of assault and battery. In December 1995, the issue was settled out of court through mediation.
Lamas of the Nyingma school are not required to take vows of celibacy, and Sogyal Rinpoche does not claim to be a celibate monk. The central role model of the Nyingma school, its founder Padmasambhava, had five tantric consorts who were also his students. While there is a precept against sexual misconduct in Buddhism, with respect to a non-monastic lama this precept is rather limited in scope and would apply only if the female is not free but rather under the protection of her father, mother, husband, king or herself bound by a vow of celibacy.
