Southampton Corporation Tramways was a transport company opened in 1879 and closed in 1949. To begin with carriages were horse-drawn, but later they were powered by electricity.
Background.
In the nineteenth century, Southampton was growing. The population grew from 27,000 in 1841 to 42,000 in 1861. This was because of a railway opening in 1839 and the docks becoming more largely used. A horse-drawn omnibus service started at about the same time as the railway opened, and by 1843 a regular service was running from the station to Millbrook, Eling, Bitterne, Shirley, Portswood, Totton and Romsey.
Tramways were becoming a lot more popular by 1872 and the British and Foreign Tramway Company contacted Southampton Corporation with an idea to set up a tramway in the town. Lots of objections were raised to the idea and the Corporation did not allow tram tracks to be put in the High Street and Above Bar. The British and Foreign Tramway Company stopped thinking about the idea.
In 1876 Southampton Corporation saw that the public transport was falling behind that of other cities. The Southampton Tramways Company was formed to build a new tramway system. The project started to be built in the summer of 1878.
Southampton Tramways Company.
The first tram ran on 5 May 1879 and the tramway made £ 26. Many people did not want the trams to run on a Sunday, and 3,500 people put their names on a petition to stop the trams running on a Sunday. The company's manager said that there were lots of people who rode on the trams on Sunday and that the service would continue. If the service made money on a Sunday, then the trams would keep running. The first tram route that opened was Stag Gate - Holy Rood, and they were allowed to run another route, Alma Road - Canute Road - Oxford Street - High Street - Floating Dock and Stag Gates - Lodge Road - Portswood from the 6 May 1879. Tramway Junction - Commercial Road - Shirley opened on 9 June 1879.
Soon after opening, the company got into some trouble. One of the managers absconded to America in 1881 and another got the sack in 1882 because there was a problem with the company's money. The company recovered though, and in 1887 it had a good financial base to stand on, and it was paying divedends of 8% a year to its shareholders. On the 22 October 1889, the Portswood route ran via Spear Road and Avenue Road. Fares cost less money in 1896 because they changed from 3d to 2d for "through routes", and the tram times became two times as fast to every 5 minutes from Stag Gates to Holy Rood. Four new trams and forty horses were needed to run this service.
The Southampton Tramway Company was bought by Southampton Corporation on 30 June 1898 for £51,000.
Southampton Corporation Tramways.
The last route to open as part of the first stage of the electrified system was Portswood - Hampton Park on 25 July 1903.
After thiese additions, the system was at its biggest. The only new lines opened after this were to miss out the Bargate Arch in Southampton. The east side opened on 24 April 1932 and the west side on 5 June 1938.
Before World War 2, two routes were also closed: Roberts Road - Millbrook, except services for workmen, which closed on 2 October 1935, but was later re-opened whilst the war was happening, and Clock Tower - Northam Bridge, which closed on 4 June 1926.
Round topped "Bargate" trams.
Prior to 1932, the only road route between Southampton High Street and Above Bar was through the arch in the centre of the Bargate. In 1923 a new design of enclosed double deck tram was introduced by P.J Baker, General Manager of the tramways, with a rounded top that would fit through the arch. These trams had smaller wheels to help reduce the overall height and were driven by high speed motors producing more torque. Despite the clever design, the roadway through the arch in the Bargate still had to be lowered and some secretive fine-tuning of the profile of the arch masonry was also required at the last minute. Trams started to pass around the East of the Bargate on 24 April 1932. The last tram to pass through the central archway did so on 4 June 1938, by which time part of Southampton ancient walls had been demolished so that the Bargate was passable on both sides.
World War One.
Southampton Tramways were mainly affected by staffing issues during World War I. With the introduction of female "conductorettes". Tram No.2, which had been converted to a toastrack in 1916, had a central gangway cut through for the benefit of the ladies. In the early years of the war, a tram went round Southampton for two hours twice a week, with a military band playing on the top deck, in an effort to boost recruitment.
World War Two.
World War II affected Southampton much more than World War One. Again women were employed, but this time they were allowed to drive the trams too. Car no.31 was destroyed by an incendiary bomb on 30 November 1940, the only loss of the war. To save the fleet of trams from the intensive bombing of Southampton during World War II, they were painted grey, regular services ceased at 7pm and they were parked up overnight in Cemetery Road on Southampton Common.
In November 1942, a tram was accidentally set in motion whilst parked up overnight, taking two others with it. The unmanned convoy of trams was stopped by a lorry before anybody was hurt. That incident caused some consternation locally, as saboteurs were thought to be responsible. It later emerged that the incident was due to a young boy playing on the trams.
Closure.
The trams in Southampton had consistently made good profits for Southampton Corporation. however, the Corporation had not reinvested those profits into the tram system. As a result, by the end of the Second World War, the whole system needed modernisation - the trams, the power supply and the track. It was decided that buses were a better alternative. The first line to close was Bitterne Park - St. Mary's - Docks, which closed on 15 May 1948. Swaythling - Portswood - Lodge Road - Stag Gates closed on 30 October 1948. Swaythling - Burgess Road - Bassett Crossroads - Avenue Junction closed on 5 March 1949. Floating Bridge - Shirley, Holy Rood - High Street - Royal Pier and Roberts Road - Millbrook all closed on 31 December 1949. The last movement of a tram in Southampton was on 4 February 1950 when cars No.21 and No.101 were moved from Shirley depot to Portswood depot under their own power. After closure, some trams were sold to Leeds, but the majority were sent to A F Harris's scrapyard at Bevois Valley for scrapping. A few were sold on from there to be used as sheds or summer houses, which enabled the preservation of three vehicles.
