Tropical Storm Gabrielle was a moderate tropical storm that moved over eastern North Carolina before turning outwards to the sea. The seventh named storm of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season, Gabrielle formed as a subtropical cyclone on September 8 about 385 miles (625 km) southeast of Cape Lookout, North Carolina. Wind shear affected the storm for much of its existence, although a short-lived decrease allowed the system to strengthen into a tropical storm. On September 9, Gabrielle made landfall at Cape Lookout National Seashore in the Outer Banks of North Carolina with winds of over 50 mph (85 km/h). Turning to the northeast, the storm quickly weakened and dissipated on September 11. The storm dropped heavy rainfall near its actual landfall location but little precipitation elsewhere. Total damages was minor, and there were no reported deaths.
Strom history.
A dieing cold front moved over just east off the coast of Georgia on September 2, leaving an area of cloudiness and showers that slowly moved drifted eastward. It slowly became better organized as its motion became erratic, and by late on September 4 the convection had become concentrated to the east of the center. On September 5, a Hurricane Hunters aircraft reported that the system had not yet gotten the characteristics of a tropical or subtropical cyclone. Contact with an upper-level trough created moderate wind shear which limited further development, and by September 6 the thunderstorm activity lost much organization. Upper-level winds became more favorable for strengthening, allowing the convection to build up about halfway between North Carolina and Bermuda. With a deep-layer ridge to its north, the system turned into a slow west-northwest movement. A reconnaissance aircraft flight late on September 7 reported a very enlarged center, with strongest sustained winds of 55 mph (90 km/h) about 100 miles (160 km) northeast of the center. Subsequent to the flight, the center became a little bit better organized, and based on the large wind field and the presence of an upper-level low to its west-southwest, the National Hurricane Center named the system as "Subtropical Storm Gabrielle" early on September 8 while located about 385 miles (625 km) southeast of Cape Lookout, North Carolina.
After becoming a subtropical cyclone, Gabrielle was found in an area of cooler air to its north, dry air to its south and west, southerly wind shear, and cooler water temperatures along its path. In spite of these unfavorable conditions, a curved convective band formed in its northern and western sections, and the circulation became better organized. Later, the rainbands in its northeastern quadrant died out, leaving the well-defined center far removed from the convection. By later that day, the circulation began to be more involved with the remaining convection. Soon, a weak warm-core was found, and the NHC re-named the sotrm as "Tropical Storm Gabrielle" late on September 8 about 185 miles (300 km) southeast of Cape Lookout, North Carolina.
Vertical wind shear slowly went down as the storm passed over the Gulf Stream, allowing a strong convective burst to form near the center. As it approached the coast of North Carolina, the center re-developed within the deep convection underneath the mid-level circulation, although increased northerly wind shear displaced the center of Gabrielle to the north of the thunderstorm activity. At about 1545 UTC, Tropical Storm Gabrielle made landfall at Cape Lookout National Seashore with winds possibly as strong as 60 mph (95 km/h). Tracking around the ridge over the western Atlantic, the storm turned to the north and north-northeast, emerging into the ocean near Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina early on September 10 as a poorly-organized system with convection far to the south of the center. Gabrielle weakened to a tropical depression shortly thereafter, and still kept scattered convection despite unfavorable wind shear as it tracked along the northern part of the Gulf Stream. By midday on September 11, the circulation had become very poorly organized and stretched out. Since the storm no longer met the criteria of a tropical cyclone, the National Hurricane Center declared Gabrielle dissipating well to the south of Nova Scotia. By early the next day, the remnants of Gabrielle were absorbed by an another cold front.
Preparations and impact.
Right after becoming a subtropical cyclone, the National Hurricane Center gave out a tropical storm watch from Edisto Beach, South Carolina to Oregon Inlet in North Carolina, including the Pamlico Sound. As the storm came closer to the coast, the watch south of Cape Fear, North Carolina was cancelled, and a tropical storm warning was issued from Surf City, North Carolina northward to the North Carolina/Virginia state border; a watch was also given northward to Cape Charles Light on the Delmarva Peninsula, and to New Point Comfort on the western shore of the Chesapeake Bay, which was upgraded to a warning the next day. Just before to Gabrielle made landfall, the National Park Service shut down visitor centers along the Outer Banks. For about 12 hours, the ferry between Hatteras and Ocracoke was closed.
By early on September 9, the outer rainbands began passing over southeastern North Carolina. A few hours after moving onto land, a wind gust of 52 mph (84 km/h) was reported at Frisco. Heavy rainfall from the storm was limited to its immediate landfall location; a station 7.2 miles (12 km) east-northeast of Newport recorded 8.60 inches (218 mm) of precipitation, the highest rainfall report that was associated with Gabrielle. In some locations, the rainfall led to flooding, which made farmers unable to harvest their crops, while in other places throughout the state, the storm wasn't able to relieve heavy drought conditions. The passage of the storm left a portion of North Carolina Highway 12 on Hatteras Island closed for three hours. Total damages in the state were minor, and no deaths were reported.
