Transcendental Meditation, or TM, is a certain way to do meditation. Today, the name is trademarked. The technique was mainly developed by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.
Transcendental Meditation is practiced while sitting down with the eyes closed; it should be done twice a day.
Procedure.
The Transcendental Meditation technique is learned in seven steps. There are two lectures, and a personal interview, followed by four sessions in which the student learns how to meditate and the meditation is checked to make sure the technique is being done correctly.
Goal.
The goal of the Transcendental Meditation technique is said to be that the meditator continue to feel the deep rest, and the comfort of the meditation while living everyday life.
Origin.
In 1955, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (born Mahesh Prasad Varma) began teaching a meditation technique he says was based on the Vedas. He gave this method for meditation the name, Transcendental Meditation.
Before this, Maharishi had studied with Swami Brahmananda Saraswati, and was his secretary from 1941 until Brahmananda Saraswati's death in 1953. In 1957, Maharishi began the Spiritual Regeneration Movement in Madras, India, on the final day of a festival held in memory of his teacher. In 1958 he began the first of a number of worldwide tours in which he began to teach the TM technique to people around the world.
In the early 1970s, Maharishi began to establish one Transcendental Meditation teaching center for each million of the people in the world, which at that time would have meant 3,600 Transcendental Meditation centers throughout the world. In 1990, Maharishi moved to the town of Vlodrop, the Netherlands, where he began an organization he called The Global Country of World Peace that takes care of all of the teaching of the Transcendental Meditation technique around the world and says there are more than 6 million people worldwide who have learned the Transcendental Meditation technique.
Effects on the Body.
Research studies show that the Transcendental Meditation technique has affects on the body. The first of these studies was carried out in 1970. The study showed that with the Transcendental Meditation technique the body rests deeply, but is not asleep, and is alert. This study also showed that with the Transcendental Meditation technique stress became less.
A study published in 1977, showed no effect on blood pressure. Later studies show that the Transcendental Meditation technique has positive effects on blood pressure, cholesterol, insomnia, aging, illness, smoking, alcoholism, anxiety, heart attack, and stroke.
The Transcendental Meditation technique, religion, and cults.
Transcendental Meditation websites say the Transcendental Meditation technique does not interfere with religion. Cardinal Sin, an Archbishop in the Catholic Church believes the technique interferes with Christian religions. There are clergy who believe the technique does not interfere with religious belief and practices.
Experts on cults say those who use the Transcendental Meditation technique may show cult-like actions, while David Orme-Johnson, a researcher who was once a professor at Maharishi University of Management, says studies show that those who use the Transcendental Meditation technique act in ways that are adult and self – sufficient, and they do not act in the way people in cults are said to act.
