Thomas Midgley (born 18 May 1889; died 2 November 1944), was an American inventor. He invented a lot of things. His two most famous inventions are both now banned because they are dangerous for the world environment: the use of lead in petrol (gasoline) and the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in refrigerators. Midgley was accidentally killed by something he was inventing.
Early life.
Midgley was born in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania. His father was also an inventor. He grew up in Columbus, Ohio, and graduated from Cornell University in 1911 with a degree in mechanical engineering.
Discovery of Ethyl.
In 1921 Midgely discovered that if tetra-ethyl lead (TEL) was added to petrol it helped to stop the engine knocking. The company he worked for, Dayton Research Laboratories, advertised the invention, but they did not call it "lead " because everyone knew that lead was poisonous. Instead, they called it "ethyl". When lead was added to petrol huge amounts of lead went into the atmosphere causing health problems all over the world. Midgley himself had to take long periods of holiday because his health was suffering through lead poisoning.
Lead continued to be put into petrol although several people working at the factory in DuPont's Deepwater, New Jersey died. GM and Standard Oil continued by using a more dangerous high-temperature method of using lead. More people started to suffer from lead poisoning: they started to hallucinate, became insane and died. In October 1924 Midgley talked at a press conference and told everybody that lead was safe. He put a bottle of the chemical under his nose and breathed it in for a minute. However, the plant was shut down after that.
Discovery of Freon.
In the 1930s Midgley developed a non-poisonous substance called CFC (chlorinated fluorocarbon) for use in refrigerators, inhalers and aerosol spray cans. He was given many high awards for his work and in 1944 he became president and chairman of the American Chemical Society.
His death.
In 1940, at the age of 51, Midgley became ill with polio which left him very disabled. He found it difficult to get out of bed. He decided to invent a complicated system of strings and pulleys to lift him from his bed. One day he got caught up in the ropes and died of strangulation.
After his death.
Midgley died before the days when people realized that CFCs were destroying the ozone layer which prevents harmful rays from the sun reaching the earth. They are now banned in refrigerators, but are still used in some countries.
In the United States it was not until 1973 that people started to produce gasoline without lead and, in 1996, the Clean Air Act banned the sale of leaded fuel for use in on-road vehicles. However it is still legal in the U.S. for aircraft, racing cars, farm equipment, and marine engines until 2008. Leaded gasoline is still common in South America, Africa, and some parts of Asia and the Middle East.
