Troy (Greek:, "Troia", also, "Ilion"; Latin: "Trōia", "Īlium",; Hittite: "Wilusa" or "Truwisa"; Turkish: "Truva") is a legendary city and center of the Trojan War, as told in the Epic Cycle as well as the "Iliad", one of the two epic poems thought to be written by Homer.
Today it is the name of an archaeological site, the traditional location of Homeric Troy, Turkish "Truva", in Hisarlık in Anatolia, close to the seacoast in what is now Çanakkale province in northwest Turkey, southwest of the Dardanelles under Mount Ida.
Troy was the most powerful kingdom in the Mediterranean sea, and thrived under the long rule of King Priam. His many sons, including the valiant, strong, unbeatable Hektor and Paris, a creative character who was not a strong fighter but a passionate man, are the best known in the Troy myth.
In Greece lay a Kingdom called Mycene, owned by Mycenian or Mykene people, ruled by King Agammenon, started a large campaign to pressure the Kingdoms of Greece and modern day Turkey to join his side and attack Troy, to capture its many riches. Legendary character, and King of Ithaca, King Odysseus (or Ulysses as he was also known), along with King Idomenous of Crete, with up to 22 more Kingdoms and Kings, spent 7 years attacking Troy. Eventually, Troy fell after a coup that Odysseus had thought up, using a wooden trojan horse to hide soldiers within in order to get soldiers behind the Trojan line of defence.
Before the fall of Troy, during the dawn of the War, King Priam sought to create an alliance with the strong Kingdom of Sparta in Northern Greece, to defend Troy when the war had begun. King Aeneas, or Helikaon as he was said to be known, King of Dardanos, was a good friend of Hektor and King Priam, and sided with the Trojans in the war. Unfortunately, on the journey back, after Hektor and Paris had forged an alliance in Sparta, Paris had taken the daughter of the King of Sparta, Princess Helen, without his consent, as they had fallen deeply in love. This had caused the alliance to be terminated, and Sparta eventually joined the fighting cause of King Agammenon.
