"The Dark Side Of The Moon" is a famous album by the band Pink Floyd.
History.
It debuted in 1973 and is their ninth album. It is one of the most famous albums of all time, frequently placing in the top five whenever a rock music authority makes a list of the greatest albums of all time.
Cover.
Its cover, which features a ray of white light going through a prism, is also one of the most famous album covers of all time. Analysts say that statistically, Dark Side Of The Moon is always playing somewhere on planet Earth. It is one of the most famous concept albums (Albums where all the songs are about a central theme. Some concept albums tell a specific story), and used to be the best-selling album of all time. There is an album-pressing plant in Germany that does nothing but create copies of Dark Side Of The Moon.
About.
Dark Side of the Moon is about life.
The opening track, "Speak to Me", features ticking clocks, a racing heartbeat, people talking, and it ends in a loud scream.
"Breathe", a modern day radio staple (Meaning that it is frequently played), is a slow moving song about how endless life feels sometimes.
"On the Run", the next song, was a major technical achievement for its time. Footsteps, airplanes, and an explosion are all heard. The song gives the listener the feeling of being chased.
"Time", one of the album's most famous songs, is about how rushed humans can feel sometimes. An idea expressed is that people give themselves so much to do, yet so little time to do it.
"The Great Gig In The Sky" is a song featuring vocals by Clare Torry. It was originally called "The Mortality Sequence", and featured sounds from religious radio.
"Money", the album's best-selling single, is a catchy jazz song about currency.
"Us & Them" is an anti-war song, reinforcing the idea from "Time" that life is too short to be wasted on something like war.
"Any Colour You Like" is an instrumental song.
"Brain Damage" is one of the most haunting songs on the album, seemingly spoken by a mentally ill person.
"Eclipse", the final song on Dark Side Of The Moon is about life in general, and recaps all the themes from the album.
The album spent over 14 years on the Billboard charts and it is currently the ninth best selling album in the United States.
