Christina "Tina" Thomas Watson, 26 years old, was an American woman from Alabama. She died on her honeymoon in Queensland, Australia in 2003. She had only been married 11 days. At first, it was believed that she died in a scuba diving accident.
Media attention.
The story has received much mediaattention. There were other people diving near them when Watson died. One diver photographed Watson while taking a picture of another diver on holiday. This picture showed Tina when she was on the bottom of the sea. This was not known until a couple of weeks later when the pictures were developed. Investigators are not certain if Tina was already dead in the picture or if she was still trying to survive.
This story was featured in a 90-minute documentary that was shown on "Dateline NBC" on Monday May 19, 2008.
Investigations.
In January 2008, this event was still under investigation because things her husband said about the accident had changed several times. Tina's husband David Gabriel "Gabe" Watson has not returned to Australia since the event. He also did not testify during the inquest. Gabe Watson claimed hundreds of thousands of dollars in insurance money from her death until it was believed that he may have killed her. In March 2005, Mr. Watson started legalaction in Alabama's Jefferson County Circuit Court to get back the cost of their trip after the travel insurance company refused a pay him. In court filings, Mr Watson referred to the Australian investigation into his wife's death. He said it caused him "to reasonably apprehend that he risks self-incrimination in this case". Mr Watson's Australian legal team believed "it was not in his best interest" to continue to legal action against the insurance company. Mr. Watson's US-based lawyer, Bob Austin added that Mr. Watson would not be voluntarily "going back to Australia".
June 19, 2008, Townsville coroner David Glasgow said that there was enough evidence to charge David Gabriel Watson with the murder of his wife. A warrant was issued for his arrest and the extradition process begun. In November 2008, charges were filed against Mr. Watson. Glasgow said that he believed that it was likely that Watson killed his wife by holding her underwater and turning off her airsupply.
