The Tour of Britain is the name of a cycle race held in United Kingdom. The race is made up of several parts in which the racers go from place to place across parts of Great Britain. The history of the event dates back to 1951. The Tour of Britain is part of the UCI's European Tour.
The race includes teams from Scotland and Wales, as well as a Great Britain team. In recent years, no English team has been entered. Teams from outside the UK compete too, for example in 2007 Team T-Mobile will take part.
The latest version, a professional stage race, was first run in 2004.
History.
The Tour of Britain has had different names. This is because many is because many different companies or groups of people have provided the money needed to have the event happen ("sponsors").
2004 Tour of Britain.
The first edition of the latest version of the Tour of Britain took place over five days in early September 2004. It was organised by SweetSpot along with British Cycling. The race was sponsored by the organisers of London's 2012 Olympics bid. It was well-promoted and many well-known teams were a part of the race. Such teams included T-Mobile (Germany) and U.S. Postal Service (USA). This was partly due to it being a 2.3 category race on the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI) calendar.
The 2004 route ended with a 45 mile (72 km) criterium in London, where tens of thousands of people watching saw a long break by Londoner Bradley Wiggins last until the final lap. Enrico Degano of Team Barloworld passed him on the final lap to win that stage of the race. The Colombian Mauricio Ardila, of Chocolade Jacques, won the Tour overall.
2006 Tour of Britain.
The Tour of Britain 2006 took place from the 29 August to 3 September as a UCI category 2.1 event. Martin Pedersen and Andy Schleck of Team CSC won the overall and King of the Mountains classification, respectively. Mark Cavendish (T-Mobile Team) won the points classification and Johan Van Summeren (Davitamon-Lotto) captured the sprints classification.
2007 Tour of Britain.
The Tour of Britain is being changed to seven days for 2007. The extra day is being used to run a stage in Somerset for the first time. Instead of finishing in London, the 2007 race will start in London and finish in Glasgow. Glasgow is using the event to increase the chance of it becoming the host of the 2014 Commonwealth Games.
