The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is one of the main protocols of the Internet Protocol Suite. TCP is so common that the entire suite is often referred to as "TCP/IP." Whereas IP handles lower-level transmissions from computer to computer as a message makes its way across the Internet, TCP operates at a higher level, concerned only with the two "end systems", for example a Web browser and a Web server. In particular, TCP provides reliable, ordered delivery of a stream of bytes from one program on one computer to another program on another computer. Besides the Web, other common usages of TCP include e-mail and file transfer. Among its management tasks, TCP controls message size, the rate at which messages are exchanged, and network traffic congestion.
Importance of TCP.
TCP provides a communication service at an intermediate level between an application program and the Internet Protocol (IP). That is, when an application program wishes to send a large chunk of data across the Internet using IP, instead of breaking the data into IP-sized pieces and issuing a series of IP requests, the software can issue a single request to TCP and let TCP handle the IP details.
IP works by exchanging pieces of information called packets. A packet is a sequence of bytes and consists of a "header" followed by a "body". The header describes the packet's destination and, optionally, the routers to use for forwarding—generally in the right direction—until it arrives at its final destination. The body contains the data which IP is transmitting. When IP is transmitting data on behalf of TCP, the content of the IP packet body is TCP payload.
Due to network congestion, traffic load balancing, or other unpredictable network behavior, IP packets can be lost or delivered out of order. TCP detects these problems, requests the lost packets to be sent again, rearranges out-of-order packets, and even helps minimize network congestion to prevent the other problems. Once the TCP receiver has finally reassembled a perfect copy of the data originally transmitted, it passes that datagram to the application program. Thus, TCP abstracts the application's communication from the underlying networking details.
