"Tomb Raider" is a computer and video game series. Originally the games were made by Core Design. Now they are being made by Crystal Dynamics. The first game was sold in 1996 for PC, PlayStation and Sega Saturn.
The main character of the game is a woman called "Lara Croft". She is an archeologist and explores ancient places, searching old relics, often fighting a great danger to the world.
Since 2001, Paramount Pictures has made two films like the game, starring Angelina Jolie.
Released Tomb Raider games.
In this game Lara Croft tries to find a treasure object called "The Scion." She visits Peru, Greece, Egypt, and Atlantis. This game was very popular in 1996. Many people bought the game. It was one of the first games in a 3-D world.
This game takes place in China, Venice and on a shipwreck. Lara Croft searches for the "The Dagger of Xian."
Now we see Lara in India, The Pacific, London and Nevada. This game had very large levels to play in. There were many different weapons for Lara.
This game is set only in Egypt. People believe this game is most difficult of all the Tomb Raider games. It takes very long to complete.
This game tells a story about Lara's history. Lara's butler and her friends talk about all her adventures. The levels are in Russia, Rome, Ireland and The United States.
Some people don't like this game. That is because it has a lot of little mistakes in it. But other people like this game very much. That is because the story is very beautiful. The Angel of Darkness takes place in Paris and Prague.
This game was made by Crystal Dynamics. All the games before this one were made by Core Design. Legend has very beautiful graphics. But many people don't like this game because it's very short and easy. In Legend, Lara goes to Peru, Bolivia, Japan, Russia, Africa, England and Nepal.
This game is the same as the first Tomb Raider. Only the graphics look better. The story is also changed a little bit. Crystal Dynamics made this game to celebrate the 10th birthday of Tomb Raider and Lara Croft.
