"The Land Before Time" is a movie series that was started in 1988 by a Don Bluth movie with the same name. So far, the series has 13 movies and a television series.
Despite rumors, it is unknown whether a fourteenth will be made.
Main Characters.
There are five main characters, collectively known as the "Gang of Five:"
Littlefoot: The leader of the gang, Littlefoot is a "longneck," the in-universe name for Apatosaurus. He is brave, and good at making decisions. He lives with his grandparents in the Great Valley.
Cera: Cera is a "threehorn," also known as a Triceratops. She is stubborn and does not trust easily. She is the most aggressive of the group. She lives with her father for most of the movies, but gains a new mother and younger sister in the 12th movie.
Ducky: Ducky has been called a "Swimmer," "Big Mouth," and "Duckfoot" on screen, so it is not known for sure what kind of dinosaur Ducky is. She looks most like a Saurolophus, but she is called a Parasoralophus on the Land Before Time Website. She is the nicest of the group, and trusts others easily. She lives with her mother and father (though her father is not often seen) and is one of thirteen twins. She also has her adopted brother Spike.
Petrie: A "flyer," or a pteranodon, Petrie gets scared very easily and is too trusting, but he is loyal and can be brave at important times. He lives with his mother and brothers.
Spike:Spike is the youngest of the group. He is a "Spiketail," which is a Stegosaurus. Spike does not talk, though it was shown in the 4th movie that he can when he wants to. He enjoys eating and lets Ducky sit on his back if she needs to. Ducky is his older sister, since she adopted him during the first movie. He lives with Ducky's family.
Also of note is a "Sharptooth" named Chomper, who was born in the 2nd movie and was so popular with fans that he returned in the 5th movie and the TV series. He is friends with all the main characters, despite his natural instincts telling him to eat them.
TV Series.
After the success of the movie series, a television series was made. It aired in Canada, Britain, and the United States of America, and had 26 episoodes. It brought back Chomper as a main character, and introduced a new friend, an Oviraptor named Ruby, who helps the other dinosaurs learn lessons and solve problems.
