Taking Back Sunday is a alternative rock band from Amityville, New York.
Taking Back Sunday released their self-titled debut EP in 2001 with the original lineup (which included singer Antonio Longo and bassist Jesse Lacey), but received little attention or fanfare. Following a change of lineup(Antonio Longo to Adam Lazzara,and Jesse Lacey to Shaun Cooper), they released the follow-up album Tell All Your Friends, which was produced by Sal Villanueva. The band's cover of "Tell All Your Friends" was recorded in New Jersey's Big Blue Meanie Recording Studios. The album gave the band a first taste of success through the single, "Cute Without the 'E' (Cut from the Team)" (which was teamed with a Fight Club inspired promo video). After the release, they played with bands such as Brand New and The Used, as well performing as a short stint on the 2003 Vans Warped Tour. Another change in their lineup occurred when singer/guitarist John Nolan and bassist Shaun Cooper left the band and formed what is now Straylight Run. Because of these departures, the band's future was in doubt for some time. However, with the additions of guitarist/vocalist Fred Mascherino and bassist Matt Rubano, the band became stabilized.
TBS's cover of "Where You Want To Be".2004 proved to be successful for Taking Back Sunday, with the band opening for Blink-182 and being one of the main headliners for the Vans Warped Tour. In addition, their second album, titled Where You Want To Be, was released on July 27, 2004 on Victory Records. This album had a different sound than Tell All Your Friends. Propelled by the single "A Decade Under the Influence", Where You Want to Be went on to debut at the #3 spot on the Billboard 200 albums chart, with sales of around 163,000 copies. Taking Back Sunday received even more mainstream exposure by appearing (on the day of Where You Want to Be's release) on the late night talk shows Jimmy Kimmel Live and Loveline, and by contributing the song "This Photograph Is Proof (I Know You Know)" to the soundtrack for Spider-Man 2. They also contributed the song "Your Own Disaster" to the Elektra soundtrack and "Error Operator" to the Fantastic Four movie soundtrack.
TBS's cover of "Louder Now".On April 25, 2006, Taking Back Sunday released their third album in Los Angeles, entitled Louder Now, on Warner Brothers Records. It nearly mirrors the first two albums in style and message, yet delivers with a more polished sound. Louder Now was leaked onto the Internet in its entirety on April 19, 2006. Taking Back Sunday received mainstream exposure by appearing on the late night talk shows The Tonight Show, Jimmy Kimmel Live, and Late Night With Conan O'Brien.
In April 2006, Taking Back Sunday took part in the 2-day "Give It A Name" indoor rock festival in England. The band played at Manchester Evening News Arena on Saturday, April 29 and London Earls Court on Sunday, April 30. During the second song of their set at the Earls Court show, Adam Lazzara accidentally knocked out Matt Rubano with his microphone. Rubano later returned to the stage sporting a large head-bandage and a noticeable amount of blood on his face. During his absence, the band carried on playing with the help of Aiden's guitarist Angel Ibarra. Following his return to the stage, Rubano continued to play while sitting down.
The band will release the follow-up single to MakeDamnSure, Twenty-Twenty Surgery, on August 21 2006 in the UK. The video premiered on the official UK website Taking Back Sunday UK on July 19 2006
Adam Lazzara - lead vocals/occasional guitar/harmonica
Jesse Lacey - Bass, backing vocals
"Timberwolves at New Jersey" (2002) (Unreleased—the video can be found on the special edit of Tell All Your Friends)
"Great Romances of the 20th Century" (2002)
"Cute Without the 'E' (Cut From the Team)" (2003)
"A Decade Under the Influence" (2004)
"This Photograph is Proof (I Know You Know)" (2005)
