The Maccabees are a English indie band based in Brighton. They first came from south London.
Name.
The band thought of the name 'The Maccabees' by opening the Bible to a random page.. Even though the name has religious meaning, lead singer Orlando Weeks said that none of the band are religious in an interview on Steve Lamacq's BBC Radio 1 show.
History.
The Maccabees' debut single, 'X-Ray', was released on the Promise record label on 28 November 2005. It was played a little in the evenings on London radio station Xfm London. The band got very attentiong until six months later, when they released their second single, 'Latchmere'. The song was about the wave machine at the band's local Latchmere Leisure Centre in Battersea, south London. It was released on Fierce Panda Records in April 2006. This song was talked about by Radio 1 DJ Steve Lamacqu and was played on MTV2. The video, directed by Hugh Frost and Samuel Bebbington, also became a hit after it was put on YouTube.
In mid-2006, the music magazine NME wrote favourable things about the band, such as a review of their show at Cafe dé Paris in London. The magazine called the band "the best new band in Britain".
In November 2006 the band toured, or traveled and played, with Fields, ¡Forward, Russia!, and Wolfmother as part of the MTV Two "Brand Spanking New Music" tour. Drummer Robert Dylan Thomas broke his wrist just before the band were due to begin touring, and was replaced by drummer Elliott Andrews. Elliot toured with the band until early 2007, and now plays drums for Kate Nash.
The band are currently signed to Fiction Records, and released their debut album 'Colour It In' in May 2007. Because the album had been leaked, or accidentally put, on the internet, 'Colour It In' became available to download exclusively from iTunes on 17 April before its release on 14 May. The song First Love was the Maccabees' first to chart in the UK top 40. It was followed by 'About Your Dress', which charted at #33. Their was released to positive reviews, and charted at #24. They toured the USA with fellow Indie group Bloc Party. A UK tour happened in October 2007, ending in a show at the Roundhouse venue in London, where all the tickets were sold.
During late 2007, Samsung used the song Toothpaste Kisses in advertising for its SGH-G800 mobile phone.
The band is currently writing music for another album.
Band members.
The band worked together to write the lyrics.
Orlando makes the band's artwork. Guitarist Felix White was once in a band called 'Jack's Basement'with close friend and current solo artist Jack Peñate, but he is not anymore. Felix and Hugo White are brothers, along with Will White, who is the lead singer and guitarist with another band, Talk Taxis.
