"Tekken 3" is a fighting video game made by Namco and was released in 1998.
Story.
The King of Iron Fist Tournament 2 closes to a draw. Jun Kazama comes to the stunning realization that Kazuya Mishima's supernatural strength stems from Devil. But she cannot help being drawn to him, propelled by a mystic force beyond her control. Several days later, the final challenger arrives to face Kazuya, the organizer of The King of Iron Fist Tournament 2. In a reprise of The King of Iron Fist Tournament 1, father and son clash in a cursed blood battle. Eventually, Heihachi Mishima emerges, scarred, but victorious, to regain control of the immense Mishima Zaibatsu. Unaware of Devil's presence, Heihachi casts the lifeless Kazuya into a volcano.
As Kazuya's body burns, the Devil appears before the pregnant Jun Kazama in a bid to enter the soul of the new life beating within her. But in a desperate struggle for the future of her child, Jun defeats Devil and retires to desolate Yakushima so as to raise Kazuya's son, Jin Kazama, alone.
Having regained control of the Mishima Zaibatsu, Heihachi sets about to further increase his powers. He embarks on a crusade to win the trust of world leaders by putting wars and conflicts to rest. Using his immeasurable wealth, he forms Tekken Force, a mercenary group employed to quell conflicts efficiently. He also takes a strong interest in the well being of developing nations by helping them build agricultural systems that will sustain them. Through Heihachi's efforts, the world appears to be regaining peace.
Around fifteen years have passed, and Jin Kazama is now 15 years old.
Under Heihachi's orders, the Tekken Force are excavating a Central American archeological site when they discover a mysterious life form. Heihachi orders the creature's capture, but loses contact with the Tekken Force after a garbled radio message, "... they are all dead... Ogre?!..."
Upon arriving at the dig, Heihachi finds a field of corpses. Heihachi is wracked by sorrow, but also realizes that the power of the mysterious life form could be the key to his long dormant dream of world domination. To obtain this mysterious power of Ogre, and the world, Heihachi tempts the fates once again...
Within weeks, strange disappearances occur throughout the world. Persons of strong soul, masters of martial arts, and other derivative fighting legends are reported missing with no knowledge of their whereabouts.
Jun Kazama instinctively picks up on the dark power encroaching on her life. She has no understanding of what it is, but senses that she has become a target. Accepting her destiny, she tells Jin everything that she knows of their haunted past to prepare him for the fateful day that she now feels is imminent. She tells Jin to go to his grandfather, Heihachi Mishima, if anything should befall her.
Her intuition proves right on a cold and stormy night. Ogre comes to the mountains, bringing a chilling, swirling wind. Jun instructs Jin to run away. But against his mother's pleas, Jin opts to face Ogre and is knocked unconscious.
When Jin awakens, the house and everything around it is burned to the ground. Jin searches frantically for his mother, but she is nowhere to be found.
Jun has died at Ogre's hands. Honoring her instructions, Jin goes to Heihachi and begs to be trained in order exact revenge. Heihachi, hearing Jin's tale, is convinced that Ogre is after the souls of powerful fighters. To attract Ogre, Heihachi decides to host the King of Iron Fist Tournament 3.
Four years later, on Jin Kazama's 19th birthday, the curtains rise for The King of Iron Fist Tournament 3. The true ending in this game is Jin's ending. Jin finally achieved his goal and killed Ogre, but is shot in the head by Heihachi. Jin is then revived by the devil in himself and flies away. Jin counts as the true winner of the tournament but Julia Chang also came close as she defeated Ogre in his first form but left with her mother, after which Ogre transformed into True Ogre and was defeated by Jin.
