"The Jungle Book" is a 1967 animated movie. It was released on October 18, 1967. The 19th animated feature in the Disney animated features canon, it was the last to be produced by Walt Disney, who died during its production. It was inspired by the stories about the feral child Mowgli from the book of the same name by Rudyard Kipling. The movie remains one of Disney's most popular, and contained a number of classic songs, including "The Bare Necessities" and "I Wan'na Be Like You". Most of the songs are by Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman. The movie was directed by Wolfgang Reitherman; his son, Bruce Reitherman, provided Mowgli's voice.
The Story.
The Jungle Book, based on the adaptation of Rudyard Kiplings classic novel, is a song-filled adventure that was the last animated movie to receive Walt Disneys personal touch. It is the story of a boy, Mowgli, as he makes his way to the man-village with Bagheera, a wise panther. Along the way he meets jazzy King Louie, the hypnotic snake Kaa and the lovable, happy-go-lucky bear Baloo, who teaches Mowgli The Bare Necessities of life and the true meaning of friendship.
"Releases".
"The Jungle Book" is available on VHS in Mexico on October 31, 1987 was complete in the Spanish language version. "The Jungle Book" was released on VHS in 1991 in the Walt Disney Classics collection and was re-released in 1997 as part of the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection for the movie's 30th anniversary. A Limited Issue DVD was released by Buena Vista Home Entertainment in 1999. The movie was released once again as a 2-disc Platinum Edition DVD on October 2, 2007 to commemorate its 40th anniversary. The Platinum Edition presents the movie for the first time in 1.75:1 widescreen aspect ratio. This is the first Disney release titled "Platinum edition" in the UK instead of "Special Edition".
Crew members.
Longtime Disney collaborator Terry Gilkyson was brought in to write the songs for the movie. Gilkyson delivered several complete songs, but Walt Disney felt that his efforts were too dark and "too Kipling". The Sherman Brothers were brought in to do a complete rewrite, on the condition that they not read Rudyard Kipling's book. The only piece of Gilkyson's work which survived to the final movie was his upbeat tune "The Bare Necessities".
The song "Trust in Me" is based upon a song entitled "Land of Sand" which had been written by the Sherman Brothers for, but not used in, "Mary Poppins".
Part of "Bare Necessities" was remixed for the theme song of its short-lived 1990s TV spin-off, "Jungle Cubs".
In the scene where Bagheera and Mowgli believe that Baloo is dead as well as Bagheera funerals Baloo, Paul J. Smith's organ score from Walt Disney's first movie "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" is heard from the scene where the 7 Dwarfs mourn Snow White on her bed before she is put into the glass coffin.
Songs.
On ', this includes "Colonel Hathi's March" on the red disc, "The Bare Necessities" on the blue disc, "I Wanna Be Like You" and "Trust in Me" on the green disc, "That's What Friends Are For" on the purple disc, and "My Own Home" on the orange disc.
On "Disney's Greatest Hits", this includes "I Wanna Be Like You" on the blue disc and "The Bare Necessities" on the green disc.
Deleted Songs.
All of the below songs were the original songs by Terry Gilkyson.
Viewers learn on the movie's commentary that Shere Kahn's extremely low bass line at the end of "That's What Friends Are For" was actually supplied by Thurl Ravenscroft of The Mellomen; George Sanders, while Richard M. Sherman says is a very good singer, was unavailable for the recording that day. It is actually Bill Lee who does Shere Khan's line of the song at the end.
Differences Between the Mowgli Stories and the Movie.
None of these stories could have been in the movie for the focus was on the Mowgli stories. The original Jungle Book screenplay by Disney Legend Bill Peet was a lot darker than the final movie. His movie also included another character from the original story, Buldeo the Hunter. But because Walt Disney disagreed on how the story should go, Peet left the studio on his birthday. This can all be seen on disk 2 of The Jungle Book Platinum Edition.
