"The Fox and the Hound 2" is a 2006 direct-to-video midquel to the 1981 Disney animated movie"The Fox and the Hound". It was produced by DisneyToon Studios, directed by Jim Kammerud], and features the voice talents of Patrick Swayze and Reba McEntire. The story takes place during the youth of Tod and Copper, in which Copper is tempted to join a band of singing stray dogs. The movie was released on December 12, 2006, rated G by the MPAA, and had an official soundtrack album released on November 21, 2006.
The Story.
Best friends Tod, a fox kit, (Jonah Bobo) and Copper, a hound puppy, (Harrison Fahn) visit a country fair when they see a band of dogs called "The Singin' Strays". The band has five members: Dixie (Reba McEntire), Cash (Patrick Swayze), Granny Rose (Vicki Lawrence), and twin brothers Waylon and Floyd (both Jim Cummings). It is important that they perform well because a talent scout from the Grand Ole Opry will be at the fair.
Cash and Dixie get into an argument, and Dixie walks off before their performance, forcing them to go on stage without her. During the show Copper sings along, and Cash invites the pup up on stage to sing with them. The musical number is a success. Cash invites Copper to join the band, which he does upon promising that he is a "stray". Copper spends the entire day with Cash, forgetting his promise to watch fireworks with Tod.Dixie finds Tod and sympathizes with his feelings of abandonment. During their conversation, Tod lets it slip that Copper isn't a stray, and Dixie hatches a plan to get Copper out of the band with Tod's help.
Tod lures Copper's owner, Slade, to the fair in a wild chase. The chase leads to widespread mayhem in the fair, and the Singin' Strays' performance is sabotaged right in front of the talent scout Mr. Bickerstaff. Copper is fired from the band and returns home with Slade. Tod is sorry for ruining everything, and is brought home by Widow Tweed. Along the way, Tweed narrowly misses being hit by the talent scout's car, and Bickerstaff's hat flies off and lands on Tod.
The following day, Tod and Copper admit their mistakes and are friends again. Hoping to amend for his doings, Tod gives Bickerstaff's hat to Copper, who uses it to track down the talent scout at a local diner. Tod tricks Cash and Dixie into thinking the other is in trouble, and the entire band end up meeting up at the diner. Copper convinces the band the importance of harmony, and The Singin' Strays howl a reprise of their song "We're in Harmony," attracting the attention of the talent scout. Impressed with the band, he arranges for the dogs to perform at the Grand Ole Opry.The movie ends with Copper choosing to leave the band and play with Tod again.
Soundtrack.
The Fox and the Hound 2 Soundtrack Album features a combination of country and bluegrass writers and performers were found in Nashville by Disney according to the music supervisor Kimberly Oliver, and Matt Walker Senior VP, DisneyToon Studios.
Background music score composer instrumental songs Joel McNeely. Bluegrass music for setting the moods of scenes, performed by several famous bluegrass performers.
