Tropical Storm Barry was a quickly forming tropical cyclone that made landfall on Florida in early June, 2007. It was the second Atlantic named storm of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season. Barry developed from a trough of low pressure in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico on June 1. It moved quickly towards the northeast, and it reached a peak strength 60 mph (95 km/h) winds. It then weakened and made landfall near Tampa Bay as a tropical depression. Barry quickly lost its identity as a tropical cyclone after wind shear disrupted much of the thunderstorm activity. The remnants of Barry moved up the East Coast of the United States, and it was absorbed by a larger extratropical cyclone on June 5.
Outer rainbands from Barry in Pinar del Río Province injured three people and damaged 55 houses. In Florida, Barry dropped moderate rainfall in an area that had seen drought conditions. The rainfall caused some flooding and led to wet roads, which caused two traffic-related deaths. Rough seas killed one surfer in Pinellas County, Florida. In Florida and Georgia, the rainfall helped firefighters fight severe wildfires. Damage from the storm was fairly minor.
Storm history.
Around May 29, a weak trough in the Yucatán Peninsula created a small area of thunderstorms over the Yucatán Channel. The thunderstorm activity increased near the weather system. By May 30, clouds from the trough extended from Nicaragua into the southeastern Gulf of Mexico. A tropical wave created an area of low pressure on May 30. On the next day, a vortex developed within the system. The storm moved towards the north-northeast, and it slowly gained strength. The thunderstorms became more concentrated near the center, and the system became a tropical depression.
The depression developed an area of squalls, and a Hurricane Hunters airplane flew into the region to gain information about the cyclone. At the beginning of its time as a storm, the tropical depression appeared to be both a tropical and subtropical cyclone. However, on June 1, the National Hurricane Center named the storm Tropical Storm "Barry". At this time, Barry was about 235 miles (375 km) to the west of Key West, Florida. Barry moved quickly towards the north north. On June 2, it reached its highest winds of 60 mph (95 km/h).
After Barry reached its highest strength, strong wind shear removed most of the thunderstorms from the tropical cyclone. The center of the system then became elongated, and it began to weaken. At 1400 UTC on June 2, Barry made landfall near Tampa, Florida while it was at tropical depression status. As Barry moved inland, it weakened more. Later that day, the National Hurricane Center said that Barry had died out over northeastern Florida. The remnants of Barry continued to move towards the northeast. On June 3, it moved onto shore again, this time in South Carolina. Late on June 4, the extratropical system entered New England. Late on June 5 the remnants of the cyclone were absorbed by a larger weather system near the border between the U.S. state of Maine and the Canadian province of Quebec.
Preparations.
When Barry was classified as a tropical storm, the National Hurricane Center issued a "tropical storm warning" for the west coast of Florida from Bonita Beach through Keaton Beach. Also, a "tropical storm watch" declared from Keaton Beach, northward to Saint Marks. An "inland tropical storm warning" was also issued for non-coastal areas of Charlotte, Citrus, DeSoto, Hardee, Hernando, Highlands, Lee, Levy, Manatee, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Sarasota, and Sumter counties. The storm caused an increased risk of rip currents, so officials told swimmers to stay out of the water until the storm left the area. A "tornado watch" was issued for the southern portion of the state, but it was removed after the storm weakened.
After becoming an extratropical cyclone, National Weather Service offices issued "flood watches" for portions of South Carolina, eastern North Carolina, southeastern Virginia, and southeastern Maryland. Other flood watches were issued for southeast Pennsylvania, northern Delaware, northern New Jersey, east-central New York, and southern New England. A type of wind advisory was issued in parts of Georgia.
Florida.
Barry dropped moderate to heavy rain in Florida, which peaked at 6.99 inches (178 mm) at Palm Beach International Airport. Other areas reported over 3 inches (75 mm) of rain. The rain helped to get rid of drought conditions, and it also helped in fighting severe wildfires across the state. In Brevard County, the rainfall caused a large sinkhole to develop on a local road. Other roads across the area were flooded, and on Interstate 95 near Lake Worth, another sinkhole closed two lanes of traffic. Wet roads caused several traffic accidents across the state. In Brevard and Volusia counties, motorists were killed from an accident. On Interstate 4, a tractor trailer crashed into a guardrail because of the the weather.
The storm caused stormy seas along the coastline of Florida, and it also produced a storm surge of 4.78 feet (1.46 m) at Clearwater Beach. The waves caused minor beach erosion The high surge also caused minor flooding on many roads near Tampa Bay. At Indian Shores, a woman died after being injured by the high seas.
Barry caused high winds in Florida, which reached 47 mph (76 km/h) near the southeastern coastline of the state. The winds knocked some trees and caused power outages. Also, one person in Carrolwood was injured when a tree crashed onto their house. The storm created several tornadoes, including some that damaged fences and power lines. One possible tornado in Goulds, Florida left about 2,000 people without power.
