The purpose of this timeline is to give a detailed account of Christianity from the beginning to the present. Question marks on dates mean that dates are only approximate.
Western culture and Christian churches use the Gregorian calendar. The Gregorian calendar has been in use since 1582 when it replaced the Julian Calendar. The Julian calendar did not calculate (work out by mathematics) the length of the year accurately. The Gregorian Calandar added Leap years to make this more correct. The Gregorian calendar began in Europe, in the reign of Pope Gregory XIII. The Gregorian calendar is now used almost everywhere in the world, (except for calculating the holy days of other religions).
The Gregorian calendar dates years from before or after the birth of Jesus. Years that are before the birth of Jesus have the initials B.C., (before Christ) and years that are after (traditionally) have the initials A.D. (anno Domini- "in the year of our Lord"). Nowdays these are often written B.C.E. ("before Common Era") and C.E. ("Common Era").
The "year one" is the first year in "anno Domini" (the Common Era). There is no year zero. When the Gregorian calendar was calculated, the mathematicians tried to work out exactly when the Birth of Jesus happened. The exact date is not certain, but most agree that it was between 6 B.C. and 4 B.C.
Era of Jesus.
This list tells only about the things that happened in the part of the world where Jesus was born. This region is now called Israel and Palestine. In the time of Jesus, it was under the rule of the Romans.
Jesus began his ministry after his baptism by John and during the rule of Pilate, preaching: "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near" (). While the historicity of the gospel accounts is questioned to some extent by most critical scholars and non-Christians, the traditional view states the following chronology for his ministry: Temptation, Sermon on the Mount, Appointment of the Twelve, Miracles, Temple Money Changers, Last Supper, Arrest, Trial, Passion, Crucifixion on Good Friday (,), Nisan 14th (,Gospel of Peter) or Nisan 15th (Synoptic Gospels), (7Apr30, 3Apr33, 30Mar36, possible Fri-14-Nisan dates, -Meier), entombment by Pharisees Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus of the Sanhedrin, Resurrection by God on Easter Sunday, appearances to Paul of Tarsus (), Simon Peter (), Mary Magdalene (,), and others, Great Commission, Ascension, Second Coming Prophecy to fulfill the rest of Messianic prophecy such as the Resurrection of the dead, the Last Judgment, and establishment of the Kingdom of God and the Messianic Age. See also Chronology of Jesus.
Era of the Apostles.
Shortly after the Death of Jesus (Nisan 14 or 15), the Jerusalem church was founded as the first Christian church with about 120 Jews and Jewish Proselytes (), followed by Pentecost (Sivan 6), the Ananias and Sapphira incident, Pharisee Gamaliel's defense of the Apostles (), the stoning of Saint Stephen (see also Persecution of Christians) and the subsequent dispersal of the church () which led to the baptism of Simon Magus in Samaria (), and also an Ethiopian eunuch (). Paul's "Road to Damascus" conversion to "Apostle to the Gentiles" is first recorded in (, cf.). Peter baptized the Roman Centurion Cornelius, who is traditionally considered the first Gentile convert to Christianity (). The Antioch church was founded, it was there that the term Christian was first used (). Saint James the Great was executed by Herod Agrippa I (ruled 39-44) during a Passover (Nisan 15) ().
Era of the Seven Ecumenical Councils.
Constantine called the First Council of Nicaea in 325 to unify Christology, also called the first great Christian council by Jerome, the first ecumenical, decreed the Original Nicene Creed, but rejected by Nontrinitarianism such as Arius, Theonas, Secundus, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Theognis who were excommunicated, also addressed Easter controversy and passed 20 Canon laws.
