"The Jungle Book 2" is a 2003 animated movie film produced by DisneyToon Studios in Sydney, Australia. It was released by Walt Disney Pictures and Buena Vista Distribution. It was released in France on February 5, 2003, and released in the United States on February 14, 2003. It is the sequel to Walt Disney's 1967 movie "The Jungle Book". Haley Joel Osment did the voice of Mowgli, and John Goodman did the voice of Baloo. The movie was going to be a direct-to-video movie, but it was released in theaters first. The movie is not based on "The Second Jungle Book" by Rudyard Kipling (published in 1895). However, they do have some of the same characters. When released, the movie was criticised mainly for its bad animation and a story similar to the original movie. Disney released the VHS and DVD versions on June 10, 2003. On June 17, 2008 a Special Edition DVD was released.
The Story.
Mowgli feels unwelcome and out of place in the human village where he now lives. When Baloo arrives for a visit, Mowgli leaves with him to go back to the jungle. However, his friend Shanti thinks he was taken by force. She follows him into the jungle. Shere Khan is still hunting for Mowgli, which puts him, as well as Shanti and Baloo, in danger. Mowli must decide whether he wants to live in the jungle with Baloo, or stay in the village with Shanti.
Soundtrack.
The band Smash Mouth recorded a cover of the Sherman Brothers song, "I Wanna Be Like You" (originally from the 1967 musical movie), which is featured on this movie's soundtrack.
Criticism.
Many people thought that "The Jungle Book 2" was too much like the original 1967 classic. Many people thought it should have gone direct-to-video like what it was originally made for. On Rotten Tomatoes, the general opinion is "This inferior rehash of "The Jungle Book" should have gone straight to video." Based on 86 reviews, the movie has a "rotten" 19%, with an average score of 4.4. In the "cream of the crop" division, the movie has a 17% with an average score of 4.1. In the RT Community, it has a 30%, with an average score of 3.7.
Box office.
The film has made a total domestic gross of $47,901,582.
