"The Fox and the Hound" is an animated movie produced by Walt Disney Productions.It was released on July 10, 1981 and is based on the Daniel P. Mannix novel of the same name. The movie centers around the story of two unlikely friends, a bloodhound and a red fox, who struggle to preserve their friendship. At the time of release it was the most expensive animated movie produced to date, costing $12 million. A direct-to-video midquel, "The Fox and the Hound 2", was released on December 12, 2006.
Making.
This movie represented a changing of the guard of the animators creating the movie from Walt Disney's "nine old men" to the more recently trained Disney animators who had moved through the in-house animation training program begun in 1976.
The story was loosely based on Daniel Pratt Mannix IV's 1967 novel of the same name.The book had a more realistic story, it dealt with the quest of a hunter and his dog Copper to shoot Tod after he killed the hunter's new dog Chief. The novel was mainly about Tod's life in the woods. While he was raised by humans he was not childhood friends with Copper and none of the animals spoke. The story was changed to make it more suitable for a family movie; instead of a story about the life and death of a fox, it became a parable about how society determines our roles despite our better impulses.
The movie marked the last work of the remaining original animators. Don Bluth worked as an animator on this movie, but left Disney early in the production, taking 11 Disney animators (which comprised 17% of the production staff) with him to start his own rival studio, Don Bluth Productions. This studio, which eventually became Sullivan Bluth Studios, was Disney's main rival through the 1980s and produced "The Secret of NIMH" and a number of other well-known movies. As a result of Bluth's defection, production on "The Fox and the Hound" was delayed by nearly six months. Bluth animated Widow Tweed and her cow, Abigail, and his team worked on the rest of the sequence.
The co-directors for the movie were Ted Berman, Richard Rich, and Art Stevens.
It was also the final Disney movie to have all the credits in the title sequence and have the words, "The End. A Walt Disney Production." at the end of the movie.
Berman previously had credits as a character animator for the 1961 movie "One Hundred and One Dalmatians" and writer for the 1977 movie "The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh". He would later be co-director for the 1985 movie "The Black Cauldron".
Rich had been a Disney employee since 1972 but this was his first major assignment. He would also serve as a co-director for "The Black Cauldron". He would later found Rich Animation Studios.
Stevens was previously credited as a character animator for the 1953 "Peter Pan", the previously mentioned "One Hundred and One Dalmatians" and the 1973 "Robin Hood". He had also previously directed the 1977 movie "The Rescuers".
Originally, the writers of the movie intended for Chief to die when he got hit by the train, so that Copper's revenge against Tod is more extreme. Story veteran Vance Gerry argued for the department: "But he gets hit in the kisser with a freight train!!" To which Ron Miller and co-director Art Stevens countered: "Geez, we never killed a main character in a Disney film and we're not starting now!" As was also the case in "Lady and the Tramp," where Trusty is seemingly killed but in a later scene has recovered, Chief suffers major injuries but is saved from death.
John Lasseter started out working at Disney on this movie and others such as "Mickey's Christmas Carol" before leaving to join Pixar in 1986. With Disney's purchasing of Pixar, Lasseter has gone full circle and has returned to the company he started his career with.
Release history.
It was released on VHS on March 4, 1994 and was the last video of the "Walt Disney Classics" collection (it was not included in the "Masterpiece Collection").
"The Fox and the Hound" was released on "Walt Disney Gold Classic Collection" DVD on May 2, 2000.
A single-disc 25th anniversary Special Edition DVD of "The Fox and the Hound" was released on October 10, 2006.
Critical reaction.
Although the movie was a financial success, the general reaction by film critics to the movie was mixed. Many were disappointed that the predominantly young creative staff, many of whom had only recently joined the company, had produced a movie that seemed very conservative in both concept and execution. Other critics, like Richard Corliss of "Time Magazine", praised the movie for its intelligent story about prejudice. He argued the movie shows that prejudiced attitudes can poison even the deepest relationships, and the movie's bittersweet ending delivers a powerful and important moral message to audiences. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Times also praised the movie. He wrote that "for all of its familiar qualities, this movie marks something of a departure for the Disney studio, and its movement is in an interesting direction. The Fox and the Hound is one of those relatively rare Disney animated features that contains a useful lesson for its younger audiences. It's not just cute animals and frightening adventures and a happy ending; it's also a rather thoughtful meditation on how society determines our behavior."
The movie gained a considerable following and it was awarded a Golden Screen Award at the Goldene Leinwand Awards in 1982. It was also nominated for a Young Artist Award and the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film.It has a "fresh" 73% rating on RottenTomatoes.com,based on 15 reviews(with a 6.8 score),and an even better score of 87% among users of RottenTomatoes with a 7.2 score.
