The Theory of Relativity was created by Galileo Galilei in the 1600s. It was then developed more by Albert Einstein in the early 1900s. The theory of relativity is two theories. The first is Special Relativity and the second is General Relativity.
Special Relativity.
Special Relativity says that every person has their own time. One person's clock says something different from another person's clock. The reason a person's time can be different from another's is because of Time Dilation, which can be thought of more easily by the Twin Paradox.
Twin Paradox.
The Twin Paradox shows how time is changed because of speed and mass. The faster someone moves or the more mass they have, the slower time passes for them. This is shown by a pair of twins. Imagine that one of the twins goes away at fast speeds while the other twin stays home. When he returns, the twin that travelled will be younger than his brother who stayed at home. This is because time moved slower for him while he was traveling than for his brother who stayed home.
General Relativity.
General Relativity adds gravity to Special Relativity. It says that space and time are joined together. Space is like a grid. Balls (planets) on the grid bend it because of their weight or speed. As one ball moves towards another it falls towards the other ball due to the dent in the grid. It can be shown by putting balls on a trampoline. The dent in the grid is like gravity.
How it works with Special Relativity.
If space and time are one thing and that is shown by a grid; then curvature of the grid show why time slows down around heavy things.
Criticism of Relativity.
G. O. Mueller wrote a whole encyclopedia refuting Einstein's relativity. Mueller, Aristotle, Kant and Leibniz say that space and time are categories of perception, not distortable "things," and so are not joined
together. The speed of light could be higher. Paul Dirac and others thought that constants can change over time, too (e.g. gravitation). Mueller lists about 4000 Einstein-critical works since 1905, rallying worldwide for rethinking relativity.
References.
Mainly, wormholes are a solution to Einstein's theory of Relativity because they both relate with time. Wormholes are theoretically believed to be able to travel through any time in space. And Einstein's theory proves that every person has a different time.
