Taiwan (Traditional Chinese: 臺灣 or 台灣, Simplified Chinese: 台湾, Pinyin: Taiwan) is a democratic island country, officially known as the Republic of China (Taiwan) in East Asia. It is southeast of the communist People's Republic of China (PRC), south of Japan, and north of the Philippines. It includes the Pescadores islands. They are located nearby. Taiwan's old name was Formosa. It means "beautiful island" in Portuguese.
The largest cities on Taiwan are the capital of Taipei and Kaohsiung.
Most people living in Taiwan (sometimes called Taiwanese) are Han. There are also Taiwanese Aborigines who lived on Taiwan before the Han came to live there.
Taiwan has three large Han groups. They are different in language and places where their ancestors came from: the Southern Fujianese (from China's Fujian Province), the Hakka (from China), and Mainlanders (from Mainland China after 1948).
these so-called "Han" were really Taiwanese Aborigines
who were forced to become like Chinese by the Qing Dynasty.
The communist People's Republic of China (PRC) says that Taiwan belongs to them, and does not think the Republic of China (Taiwan) has a right to exist as a country. But most Taiwanese citizens think the ROC (Taiwan) does not belong to the People's Republic of China and that the ROC (Taiwan) is a free country. Still others think that Taiwan should change their name to the "Republic of Taiwan" instead of using the current name Republic of China (Taiwan).
Status of Taiwan.
There are two Chinese governments in the world: The People's Republic of China (PRC) and the Republic of China (ROC). PRC claims control over the island of Taiwan (which is also known as Taiwan province). Today, in reality, the PRC government controls mainland China, and the ROC government governs Taiwan. The PRC government has never occupied Taiwan. The ROC government occupied mainland China from 1911 to 1949, before losing control of mainland China to the communist PRC.
Today, people who live in Taiwan have different ideas. Many Taiwanese think there is no freedom in China. Although some people on the island want to be united again with China, others want Taiwan to formally declare independence. But most of the people in Taiwan want to keep everything like it is now, at least until China becomes free.
Today most countries of the world recognize the People's Republic of China as China. Even though Taiwan is not recognized by UN as a sovereign nation, most countries still have very close economic and cultural relationship with the island of Taiwan. The government of China have said that if the people of Taiwan formally votes to become the Republic of Taiwan, they will invade Taiwan. So, there is now a situation where both sides are not making any big changes.
In March 2004, China's government passed a law that will allow China to invade Taiwan if the people of Taiwan vote to become the Republic of Taiwan. This law hurt the feelings of the people in Taiwan very much, especially since the government of mainland China does not rule Taiwan. It has caused even more people in Taiwan to not want to be re-united with mainland China.
