Van Diemen's Land was the name used by Europeans for the island of Tasmania. Tasmania is now a state of Australia. The Dutch explorer Abel Tasman was the first European to explore Tasmania. He named the island "Anthoonij van Diemenslandt" after Anthony van Diemen, the Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies. Van Diemen had sent Tasman to explore the area in 1642.
In 1803, the island was settled by the British as a penal colony. It was called Van Diemen's Land, and became part of the British colony of New South Wales. In 1824, Van Diemen's Land became an independent colony. In 1856 Britain gave the colony the right to govern itself. It had its own parliament. The name of the island was changed to Tasmania.
Penal colony.
From the 1830s to 1853, Van Diemen's Land was the main penal colony in Australia. When Britain stopped sending prisoners to New South Wales, all convicts were sent to Van Diemen's Land. About 75,000 convicts were sent to Van Diemen's Land. This is about 40% of all convicts sent to Australia.
Male convicts worked as servants or farm workers to free settlers, or in work groups on public works. Only the most difficult convicts were sent to the Tasman Peninsula prison known as Port Arthur. Convicts who did more crimes were also sent there. Female convicts worked as servants in free settler's houses or were sent to a female factory (women's workhouse prison). There were 5 female factories in Van Diemen's Land.
Convicts who had finished their time in prison or had been well behaved and given a ticket-of-leave often left Van Diemen's Land. Many went to the new free colony of Victoria. The free settlers in towns such as Melbourne did not like the ex-convicts coming to their town. During the Victorian gold rush a lot of settlers from Van Diemen's Land (called Vandemonians) went to the Victorian gold fields, such as Ballarat, or Bendigo.
Britain stopped sending convicts to Tasmania in 1853.
The name.
Anthony Trollope used the word "Vandemonian": -
"They are (the Vandemonians) united in their declaration that the cessation of the coming of convicts has been their ruin" (The Vandemonians agree that stopping the convicts from coming has made them poor).
Because the name Van Diemen's Land was seen to be tied up with convicts and it sounded like the word "demon", Van Diemen's Land was renamed in 1856. It was called "Tasmania" after Abel Tasman. The last penal settlement in Tasmania at Port Arthur finally closed in 1877.
