A vocation (Latin for a calling) is a job that suits a person best. It is also the desire to do a particular job, especially a religious career like being a priest. For religious people, a vocation is often something they feel God has asked them to do. A vocation is followed more for spiritual or emotional reasons than for money, which is a helpful extra benefit from a vocation but not the reason for it.
In Christianity.
Vocations meet a psychological or spiritual need for the worker, and the word can also be used for a job at which a person is gifted. The word "vocation" comes from the Latin "vocare", meaning "to call";. In the past the word meant people's being called to follow Christianity. Martin Luther was the first to use it in the modern way, to describe a life-task.
Christians believe God has created each person with gifts and talents designed for a reason. Christians can be called to vocations that are faithful to Christian teachings, such as marriage, or to be a priest, monk or nun, chastity as a single person or the general calling to live a life that is right, for the good of the Church or humanity.
For those who are not priests or full-time religious people, Protestantism was important in telling them they still had a vocation. Calvinism told people to work hard in life. Calvin said a Christian had two callings; a general calling to serve God and a calling to do a particular job in which they are useful. Protestant ministers in the past said working hard gives god glory. Without something to do, they said people were more likely to sin.
Vocation for non-Christians.
This belief still has an influence on the less religious world of today. Modern occupations which are seen as vocations are those which involve caring or teaching, such as medicine nursing teaching or veterinary work. Politics, may also be seen as a vocation. Campaigning for human rights, such as with the groups Amnesty International and Greenpeace can also be seen as a vocation, although the word tends to mean a full-time job rather than a hobby. People following other religions can also feel called to do a certain job by their gods.
