The word Voodoo, which has many different names and spellings (like "Vodun, Vodou, Voudou, Vudu, Vodoun") is the name of a West African religion. Voodoo is animist and spiritist, and a lot of Voodoo beliefs have to do with ancestor spirits. Some of it is based on Catholic beliefs, but most of Voodoo is from the Fon, Ewe, and Yoruba peoples. The word vodún is the Fon-Ewe word for spirit.
In Voodoo many gods and spirits are prayed to or called on. Both spirits of nature and of dead people are important. The spirits of family member who have died are especially important. Voodoo often has rituals with music and dancing. Drums are used to make most of this music. In Voodoo people often believe that a spirit is in their body and controlling the body. Having a spirit come into is wanted, and important. This spirit can speak for the gods or dead people you love, and can also help to heal or do magic.
African Vodu: the beginning of Voodoo.
Voodoo came to places like Haiti and the United States as Vodu. Some people think Voodoo and Vodu are the same religion. Some people think they are not the same religion because Voodoo has changed some after it was taken from Africa. For example, African Vodu often has animal sacrifice (the animal is killed for the spirits), but this is not common in Haiti and never done in the United States. Another example is that an African sea god became a Haitian sea Goddess. Voodoo in Haiti and America has also added some Catholic ideas that were not known in African Vodu.
Voodou in Haiti.
Voodoo is the main religion in Haiti. When Haiti beat the French in a war and became its own country, the people of Haiti believed that Voodoo had helped them win. Also, in Haiti there are both good priests and "dark" sorcerers (called bokor). The bokor acts like a kind of religious policeman, and may curse bad people. It is the bokor who are said to make zombies; becoming a zombie is the worst curse because it means you loose your soul.
Voodoo in the United State.
Some people from Africa and Haiti brought Voodoo to the United States. One such person was Marie LaVeau, who was callled "the Voodoo queen of New Orleans." Marie was a pacifist and known for healing people. The local Catholic priest let Marie do Voodoo in the Catholic church (this would not usually be allowed). Marie became famous, so she and others led many in the U.S. state of Louisiana to believe in Voodoo.
In most parts of the U.S., Voodoo is most commonly believed in by black people. But, in Louisiana, the U.S. state with the most Voodoo believers, Voodoo has many white followers too.
Voodoo in Brazil.
Voodoo is also done in Brazil
Voodoo in Popular Culture.
In the U.S. the word Voodoo is often used to mean any kind of magic. Also, Voodoo is often seen as scary, morbid, or spooky. People who believe in Voodoo say this is not right, but many other people see Voodoo that way. Because of this, Voodoo has been shown in many horror movies. For example, a Voodoo priest may make killer zombies in a movie about zombies. Another example is the movie "Child's Play" where a Voodoo priest puts the soul of a killer into a doll. In the movie "Predator II" a violent gang is led by a Voodoo priest named King Willie.
There was also a song about Marie LaVeau. In the song, Marie is described as a "witch" who "lives in the swamp in a hollow log" and kills people with a magical scream. Though this is not accurate, the song may be better known than the real woman.
