Vampires are monsters in legends and stories. The first vampire legends were told in Eastern Europe, but much of how modern people see vampires was created by Bram Stoker in the famous novel, "Dracula". Few people believe that vampires are real, but they are still very popular in movies, television, and books.
Vampires were once people but have a supernatural curse. Some vampires must drink blood to survive. They do this by biting people or animals on the neck with their two long fangs. People who are killed by having their blood drank by vampires may also become vampires. Others can live off the life energy of people. In many stories, vampires can change into other animals, usually bats, though also wolves, cats or rats.
Vampires in fiction.
Dracula is the most famous vampire in fiction, and several movies have been made about him. There is also a popular series of books by Anne Rice about vampires. The television show "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" featured a young girl who fought vampires, but also befriended good ones. The "New York Times" bestselling series "Twilight" by Stephenie Meyer is also about vampires. The movie The Lost Boys was about a band of vampires in (then) modern California. Among many other stories, shows and movies about vampires.
What lies beyond the myth.
Some neurolgists believe that rabies might lie at the base of the myth.
The problem with this is that rabid people, especially in advanced stages of the disease, will live for about 10 days, at best. This does not account for them getting out of ditches and graves over weeks or months.
Another explanation was given by other people. The disease might be porphyria, rather than rabies. Porphyria is a genetic condition that leads to differences when the body makes blood. Some parts of the blood can not be made in sufficient quantities.
Psychological disorders can contribute to vampiric behavior. As well as the fact that drinking blood has always been believed to give you the strength of the one you drink from. That belief stems all the way back to ancient civilizations.
They are people in the real world who like to dress and behave like a vampire. Some of them may also drink blood.
Finally, there is the vampire bat.
