Dr. Ved Pratap Vaidik (hi: वेद प्रताप वैदिक) is a well-known scholar, political analyst, orator and a columnist on national and international affairs. Dr. Vaidik worked with Press Trust of India for a decade as the Founder-Editor of its Hindi News Agency "BHASHA". Earlier he held the position of Editor (views), Nav Bharat Times (the then largest circulated National Hindi daily).
Early academic life.
Born on the 30th December 1944, Dr. Vaidik has been throughout a first class student. He was awarded the degree of Ph.D. in International Affairs from Jawaharlal Nehru University in 1971. He knows Russian, Persian, English, Sanskrit, Hindi and several other Indian languages. He won several all India awards in debating and elocutionary contests.
Field work.
While doing research, Vaidik studied at Columbia University, New York, School of Oriental and African Studies, London; Institute of the Peoples of Asia, Moscow and did extensive field work in Afghanistan. As an expert on international affairs and an Editor, Dr. Vaidik has had an opportunity to rub shoulders with Prime Ministers, Foreign ministers, dissidents and guerilla leaders of several Asian and Western countries. He has been a member of the Indian Delegation to the UN in 1999. He also had the honor of inaugurating the Annual Conference on South Asia organized by Wisconsin University in 1999.
Expulsion.
As a Ph.D. Student at Indian School of International Studies, Vaidik, insisted on writing his thesis in his mothertongue, Hindi. It led to his expulsion from the School. The principled stand of Vaidik evoked nationwide response and the Indian Parliament went through unprecedented debates and uproarious scenes in 1966-67. Vaidik created history by winning the right for all Indian languages to be the medium of expression at the highest academic level.
Later life.
He has been frequently appearing on Indian and Foreign television and broadcasting networks since 1962. More than a dozen newspapers carry his column currently. He is one of the most reputed mass orators in India. He has also been invited by several Indian and foreign universities to deliver special lectures on International Politics and Journalism.
Later academic life.
Dr. Vaidik has taught Political Science at Motilal Nehru College, Delhi University and has been a Senior Fellow at the Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses and at SIS Jawaharlal Nehru University. He has several award winning research publications to his credit.
Dr. Vaidik is a widely travelled scholar-journalist. He has visited more than 60 countries on various missions. Dr. Vaidik has won more than a dozen National and International awards for academic and journalistic excellence. He has been a member of several Advisory Committees of Government of India. Currently, he is the Chairman of Council for Indian Foreign Policy and Bhartiya Bhasha Sammelan.
Dr. Vaidik on Afghanistan.
Dr. V.P. Vaidik is a renowned expert on Afghanistan. He is the only one among the top Indian experts on international affairs, who has studied at Kabul University, knows the languages of Afghanistan and has traveled extensively in that country. His Ph.D. thesis (JNU): A Comparative Study of Afghanistan's Relations with the USA and the USSR has won international acclaim, though it was written in Hindi, which ignited uproarious debates in the Indian Parliament 35 years ago.
Vaidik as an author.
Dr. Vaidik has published two books and more than 80 articles and research papers on Afghanistan including a few in English, Russian and Persian. Dr. Vaidik is in touch with almost all the Presidents, Prime Ministers and major factional leaders of Afghanistan throughout these years of turmoil.
He has written books on topics of national and international repute like Ethnic Crisis in Sri Lanka, Angrezi Hatao: Kyon aur kaise, Bhartiya Videsh Niti etc. He has achieved many awards and felicitations like Vishva Hindi Samman, Patrakarita Bhushan Samman, National Academy Award to name a few.
He is the former Editor of PTI-Bhasha and Nav Bharat Times. He has been a Senior Fellow at IDSA and School of International Studies (JNU) 1981-83. He is one of the most reputed columnists in Hindi.
Major works.
A PHD in International relations, Dr. Vaidik has written numerous editorial pieces and written many research journals and books on issues of national and international importance.
He has to his credit more than 1000 articles in his name published in eminent newspaper like Times of India, Hindustan Times, Pioneer, World Focus and many more. He has been invited by several Indian and foreign Universities to deliver special lectures on International politics and Journalism.
