Valentin Berlinsky (born Irkutsk, 19 January, 1925; died 15 December, 2008) was a Russian cellist. He played with the world-famous Borodin Quartet from 1945 when it was founded, and was a member until he retired in 2007.
Early life.
Valentin Berlinsky was born in Irkutsk, Siberia. His father had learned the violin with the famous teacher Leopold Auer. He had formed his own string quartet, the Berlinksy Quartet, who had played in many parts of the Soviet Union. Valentin learned the violin from his father. Soon he was sent to Moscow where he studied the cello and played with the Moscow Youth Orchestra. He played in a student concert together with Mstislav Rostropovich in 1938.
For many years Berlinsky taught the cello at the Gnessin School of Music in Moscow. He did not often perform as soloist. He preferred being a member of a chamber music group.
The Borodin Quartet.
In 1945 four young players formed a string quartet called the Moscow Conservatoire Quartet. Mstislav Rostropovich was the cellist, Rostislav Dubinsky and Nina Barshai played the violins and Rudolf Barshai played the viola. However, after a couple of weeks Rostropovich found he was too busy, so he suggested that Berlinsky should take his place. The four players that now formed the quartet signed an oath that they would be loyal and stay together as a group. They signed the oath with their own blood. Valentin often showed this piece of paper to people. For 60 years he kept a careful record of all the concerts they played. They called themselves the Borodin Quartet after the composer Alexander Borodin.
The four musicians first met Dmitri Shostakovich in 1946. They became famous for playing his string quartets. Shostakovich was to compose 15 string quartets. The Borodin Quartet were the most famous string quartet in the Soviet Union, but it was difficult for them to get permission to play in other countries until the fall of the Soviet Union.
Last years.
Valentin Berlinsky retired from the Borodin Quartet in September 2007. His place was taken by his pupil, Vladimir Balshin, but Berlinsky still continued to help the quartet.
He died on 15 December 2008, in Moscow, after a long illness. His daughter Lyudmila is a pianist.
References.
Obituary to Valentin Berlinsky, The Daily Telegraph, 23 Dec 2008 p.23
