What is known as Virgin birth of Jesus is a belief held by Christians and Muslims. It says that Mary remained a virgin when Jesus was conceived. This belief was widespread Christian church by the second century, and the doctrine was included in the two most widely used Christian creeds, which state that Jesus "was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the "Virgin" Mary" (the Nicene Creed as revised by the First Council of Constantinople) and was "born of the "Virgin" Mary" (Apostles' Creed). The belief was not challenged, except by some sects which did not have much importance, before the Enlightenment theology of the eighteenth century.
The gospels of Matthew and Luke say that Mary was a virgin and that Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit. These gospels set going the current belief that Jesus' conception was a miracle and he had natural father; no sexual intercourse and no male seed was involved in conceiving him. The Gospel of Matthew also says that the virgin birth of Jesus fulfils a prophecy from the Book of Isaiah.
Most people believe the "virginity" of Mary is a reference to his "conception", not his birth. But in Roman Catholic and Orthodox usage, the term "Virgin Birth" means not only that Mary was a virgin when she conceived, but also that she gave birth as a virgin (remaining a "virgo intacta"). This has been believed since the second century. See Perpetual virginity of Mary.
Mary's virginity at the conception of Jesus is also part of Islam. The Qur'an often refers to Jesus with the matronymic Jesus son of Mary ("Isa bin Maryam").
Hidden Meaning.
According to Uta Ranke-Heinemann, the virgin birth of Jesus was not meant to be taken literally. It should be understood as an allegory of a special initiative of God. It could be compared to the creation of Adam in the sense that both creations were by God.
Illegitimacy.
Jesus may have been an illegitimate child. This claim can be traced back to about 177-180 AD, when Celsus, basing himself on Jewish sources, wrote: According to this view, the accounts in Matthew and Mark were intended as a response to this charge.
Epistles of Paul.
The letters of Paul of Tarsus are considered to be the earliest texts in the New Testament. They do not state that Jesus' mother was a virgin.
But when the fullness of time had come, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law...
This phrase speaks of Jesus as born "of a woman", not "of a virgin". This is sometimes seen as evidence that Paul did not know about the virgin birth of Jesus. However, the phrase "born of a woman, born under the law" could imply that Jesus had no human father. This is because it was common for Hebrews to list only the father, or otherwise both parents. The fact that the father is totally missing suggests that was no father.
Some people think that this to do with the curse upon Jeconiah () as evidence of God's miraculous working, saying that only by a virgin birth could Jesus have Joseph as a legal father, but avoid the curse through Jechoniah that none of his descendants would prosper and sit on the throne of David.
Whether "descended from David according to the flesh" implies physical descent through Joseph is disputed.
While some see "in the likeness of sinful flesh" as meaning merely that Jesus was externally like any other human being, others suggest that there is a contradiction between the notion of being in the likeness of sinful flesh and having been born of a virgin.
As has been remarked by students of the New Testament, the order of writing of the books shows that the oldest Christian preaching about Jesus concerned his death and resurrection. They turned their attention also to the deeds and words that came to them from the traditions of Jesus' ministry, which were formed into collections arranged in logical rather than chronological order, and which formed a basis for the four canonical Gospels, of which Mark is the earliest. gives an outline similar to Mark's, beginning with the baptism and ending with the resurrection, with no mention of the birth. Only later, for reasons not only of curiosity but also of apologetics and theology, attention was given to the birth and infancy, as in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke.
The fact that Paul didn't write about the infancy and even the ministry of Jesus may be seen as fitting this pattern.
