A village is a place where people live, normally in the countryside. It is usually larger than a hamlet and smaller than a town or city. In the past, villages were where most people lived. After the Industrial Revolution, when people started making a lot of things in factories, people lived more in towns. Moving to towns is called urbanization.
Villages in the past.
There have been many sorts of villages and ways of village life. But usually, villages were small, with only 5 to 30 families. Homes were together, so people were with friends and felt safe. They grew food on the land by the village.
England.
In England the biggest difference between a hamlet and a village is that villages have a church. The difference between a village and a town is that the town has a market.
There are a lot of villages which people say are the biggest village in England. Some are Cranleigh in Surrey, Cottingham in the East Riding of Yorkshire, both Haddenham and Wendover in Buckinghamshire, Braunton in Devon, Birchington in Kent, Horsforth in West Yorkshire, Street in Somerset, Bembridge on the Isle of Wight, Ruskington in Lincolnshire and Kidlington in Oxfordshire.
Incorporated villages.
In twenty US states, a "village" is a sort of local government, similar to a city but with less power and for a smaller place. But this is not so in all the United States. In many states, there are villages which are bigger than the smallest cities in the state. The difference is not the population, it is how much power the different sorts of places have, and what they do for people living there.
New York state.
In New York state, a village is a place which is usually in a town. There are villages which are in more than one town (several examples are in Westchester County). Some villages are in two counties.
Unincorporated villages.
In many states, a "village" is only a place where people live, with no legal power, similar to a hamlet in New York state. The name for these is "unincorporated villages".
