The Vikings were the people who came from Scandinavia (Denmark, Norway, Finland, and Sweden) around 800AD-1100AD and who travelled great distances in their longboats, as both traders, settlers and warriors. Many of the Vikings were tall and had red or blonde hair and beards. Villages on or near any coast in early medieval Europe lived in great fear of Viking attacks. Some of the countries most affected by Viking piracy were England, Scotland, Ireland, and France. Many words from their language (Norse) entered our language. For example, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday & Friday are named after the Vikings' gods Tiw, Odin, Thor & Frig (wife of the god Odin); 'skirt & shirt' come from the word "skyrta" (which meant 'shirt'); 'skin' from 'skinn' (which meant to strip the meat off a thing). Many place-names in the areas the Vikings conquered still have their Norse names, like those in Yorkshire ending "-thwaite" which meant a clearing; "dale" a valley.
Exploration.
The Vikings were fearless explorers. They travelled through Russia, the Mediterranean Sea, southern Europe, northern Africa and south-western Asia. Some Vikings sailed across the Atlantic Ocean via Iceland and Greenland and even lived in North America for a while, but were driven away by Native Americans, whom they called Skraelings. The ruins of a Viking settlement from 1000 AD have been found at L'Anse-aux-Meadows, Newfoundland.
The Vikings left Scandinavia for more than one reason. Wars at home made trouble between groups and left some people without homes. Rising populations (numbers of people) caused a shortage of food and good land. Therefore the Vikings traded their goods, or stole food and treasure from countries they invaded and sometimes settled there. They attacked many monasteries, where they knew there would be wealth (money, gold, silver), but probably no soldiers. Over time they became accepted and married into the native population.
Vikings in Europe.
Europeans were frightened of the Vikings because of their strong weapons, swift attacks, and cruel fighting tactics (they fought dirty). They were known for their bad treatment of women, children and monks in the places where they fought. When the Vikings came to England, the English kings paid them to leave the country, but the Vikings took their money and sometimes fought them anyway. These payments were called Danegeld. From the 9th century to 1066, when the French Duke of Normandy, who became King William I of England conquered it, Danish and Norwegian Vikings ruled large parts of England.
Because of their longboats, which could float in 4 feet (1.3m) of water, the Vikings were able to make their way up rivers and land deep inside a country. For example they sailed up the River Shannon in Ireland and built a harbour 60 miles (100km) from the coast.
