Valeri Brainin, Russian/German musicologist, music manager, composer, and poet. Born 27th of January 1948 in Nizhni Tagil, Russia, in the family of Austrian poet and translator, political emigre Boris Brainin (Sepp Österreicher), who belonged to the well-known Viennese Brainin family. He lives at the moment both in Hanover, Germany, and in Moscow.
Positions.
President (from 2004) of the Russian Federation Society for Music Education (RussSME) – National Affiliate of the International Society for Music Education (ISME), a member of UNESCO.
Head of the Laboratory of New Technologies in Music Education, Moscow State Pedagogical University.
Art Director of Classica Nova International Music Competition.
Art Director of the net of Brainin Music Schools (Brainin-Musikschulen), Germany.
He has directed seminars/master courses at conservatoires and universities in Austria, Columbia, Germany, Italy, Russia, USA, etc. In addition he offered weekly music talks on Radio Liberty from Munich and Prague, and has literary, critical and scientific musical publications in Russian, German, English, and Italian.
Music activities.
Brainin is a full Member of the International Teacher's Training Academy of Science (Moscow), and of other scientific/pedagogical societies, he studied mathematics, linguistics, musical pedagogics, music theory and composition. He has had works performed in the Bolshoi Theatre, Moscow, and taught at Moscow's Gnessin Music School for specially gifted children. The Brainin Teaching Method for ‘development of musical intelligence in children’ became a standard part of the curriculum. He is also a noted piano teacher for children. Among his former students there are some prize-winers of national and international competitions.
Literary activities.
Russian poet (also known as Valeri (Willi) Brainin-Passek), a pupil of Arseny Tarkovsky, a member (1985-1990) of Moscow Club „Poezia“ () together with Yury Arabov, Jewgenij Bunimovitch, Mikhail Epstein, Alexandr Eremenko, Sergej Gandlevskij, Nina Iskrenko, Timur Kibirov, Alexei Parshchikov, Dmitri Prigov, Lev Rubinstein, a. o.
literary magazines "Znamya" (Moscow), "Novy Mir" (Moscow), "Arion" (Moscow), "Ogonyok" (Moscow), "Grani" (Frankfurt-am-Main), "Dvadtsat dva" (Jerusalem), "Kreshchatik" (Kiev), anthologies "Verses of the Century" (Moscow, compiled by Yevgeny Yevtushenko) and "Verses of the Century-2" (Moscow).
literary magazine "Partisan Review" (Boston).
