Queen Victoria (May 24, 1819 – January 22, 1901) was the queen of Great Britain and Ireland from 1837 until 1901. She reigned (was on the throne) longer than any other monarch (king or queen) in the history of the United Kingdom. She was born in 1819, and became queen at only age 18. Her uncle William IV had been king, but when he died, her father was already dead and so she became queen.
At first she was not popular with the people she ruled, because they thought she showed little interest in what happened to them. In 1840 she married Prince Albert, her cousin, and together they started to be more and more popular. They encouraged British science, trade and art. They had nine children, and made it clear they believed that a good family life, and Christianity, were very important. In general, English people followed their example.
Prince Albert and Victoria were now seen by the public as being interested in how well the country and its people lived. In 1851 the "Crystal Palace Exhibition" opened. This is usually called "The Great Exhibition". It happened partly because of Albert's hard work, and the exhibition featured the achievements of British people in a huge centre called Crystal Palace.
But in 1861, Prince Albert died and Victoria began to keep away from public life; This made her less popular. During the years that followed, Britain became more powerful and in 1887 Victoria became "The Empress Of India". She again began to be more interested in the politics of the country, and so more popular with her people. In 1897, she had her Diamond Jubilee, to celebrate 60 years as queen.
Many of Victoria's children became monarchs or princes and princesses of other countries. Queen Victoria was always very interested in India, although she never went there. She was also very fond of Scotland and painting, which she did herself, photography, singing and kept a regular diary throughout her life.
She was educated by her governess, Louise Lehzer, and the Reverand George Davys.
