Sir William Sterndale Bennett (born Sheffield, 13 April 1816; died London, 1 February 1875) was an English composer and pianist.
Bennett's father Robert Bennett was an organist. He was still young when his father died, and he was brought up at Cambridge by his grandfather, who gave him his first music lessons. In 1824 he was a choirboy with the choir of King's College chapel. In 1826 he entered the Royal Academy of Music, where he spent ten years studying. His piano teachers were W. H. Holmes and Cipriani Potter, and he learned composition from Charles Lucas and Dr Crotch. It was during this time that he wrote some of his most popular works. He often went to Germany, and his music shows the influence of German composers of his time, especially Mendelssohn. At one of the famous Leipzig Gewandhaus concerts he played his third piano concerto, which the audience liked very much. Robert Schumann said that Bennett was the most musical Englishman and an "angel of music".
When he returned to England he became organist of St Anne's Chapel, Wandsworth. In the same year (1834) he composed his Overture to "Parisina", and his Concerto in C minor, a work in which he shows that he had studied the music of Mozart. An unpublished Concerto in F minor, and the Overture to "The Naiads", impressed the firm of Broadwood and Sons so much in 1836 that they offered the composer a year in Leipzig, where the "Naiads" Overture was performed at a Gewandhaus concert on 13 February 1837. Bennett visited Leipzig a second time in 1840-1841, when he composed his "Caprice in E for pianoforte and orchestra" and his overture "Die Waldnymphe" ("The Wood Nymphs").
He settled in London, spending most of his time teaching. In 1844 he married Mary Anne. He was made Professor of Music, Cambridge University in 1856, the year in which he became permanent conductor of the Philharmonic Society. He held this post until 1866, when he became principal of the Royal Academy of Music. He spent a lot of his time and energy teaching, and the music he composed during this time was not as good as the music from his early years.
Bennett wrote almost all kinds of music except opera. His best works include piano music (his three sketches, "The Lake", "The Millstream" and "The Fountain", and his third piano concerto); orchestral music (his Symphony in G minor, and his overture "The Naiads"); and vocal music (his cantata "The May Queen", written for the first Leeds Festival in 1858. For the Golden Jubilee of the Philharmonic Society he wrote the overture "Paradise and the Peri" in 1862. He also wrote a sacred cantata, "The Woman of Samaria", which was first performed at the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival in 1867.
In 1870 he was given an honorary degree by the University of Oxford A year later he was knighted, and in 1872 a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music was formed in his name. Shortly before his death he produced a sonata called "The Maid of Orleans" based on Schiller's play. He died at his home in St John's Wood, London.
