Wicca music or Wicca rock is music influenced by the Wicca religion and its beliefs relating to nature and conservation written by Wiccan musicians living in some of the most naturally beautiful forest regions of the world, in Canada.It is said by some to be an emerging sub-genre of alternative music
Bands That Identify As Wicca Rock Musicians.
The early signs of this category's formation got people talking. A music band called touredCanada and the USA singing and talking about Wicca. The Themis body of works promotes things that are Wiccan such as the divinity of nature; the Lord and Lady (dual deity aspect of Wicca) and an ethical credo that resembles Wiccan philosophies.
Another Canadian band, a group of vocalists from Vancouver Canada, the, also perform original pieces based on the beliefs of Wicca and
Wicca Rock Tied To Ecology and Religion.
The also mirrors the adopted by the United Nations and by the 1993 Parliament of the World's Religions in Chicago..
Comparing with Wicca Music's ecological and ethical aspects suggests that Wicca Music (and Wicca in part) satisfies the Declaration for a Global Ethic's request for universal adoption.
"All historical experience demonstrates the following: Our earth cannot be changed unless in the not too distant future an alteration in the consciousness of individuals is achieved. This has already been seen in areas such as war and peace or economy and ecology. And it is precisely for this alteration in inner orientation, in the entire mentality, in the "heart," that the religions bear responsibility in a special way. Here we remain aware, however, that a universal consensus on many disputed individual ethical questions (from bio- and sexual ethics through mass media and scientific ethics to economic and political ethics) will be difficult to attain. Nevertheless, even for many questions still disputed, differentiated solutions should be attainable in the spirit of the fundamental principles jointly developed here.
In many areas of life a new consciousness of ethical responsibility has already arisen. Therefore, we would be especially pleased if as many as possible national or international professional organizations, such as those for physicians, scientists, business people, journalists, and politicians, would compose up to date codes of ethics."
Wicca Music Subculture.
Evidenced in lyrics of "Wicca" songs like "I am The Shadow" by Themis, "Love of Life" by Themis, and "Ancient Trees" by Chalice and Blade Wiccan musicians support a culture promoting ecology; of non-violence and respect for life; the divinity of mother nature; solidarity with 'earth'; a just economic order; tolerance, healing and truthfulness and equal rights and partnership between men and women (although Wiccan women have a higher rank).
Wicca's Small Following is Moving Into The Mainstream.
According to "Wicca is moving into the mainstream" smashing stereotypes as their movement matures. Throughout America, Wiccans are organizing congregations and youth groups, training clergy, pursuing charity work, sharing parenting tips and fighting for civil rights.
Wicca is a diverse earth-based religious tradition that honors nature and the cycles of the seasons. Wiccans celebrate solar holidays such as the solstices, equinoxes and the four midpoints in between, as well as lunar cycles. This religion is one of the fastest-growing in the United States, and it is notable for the leadership of women, concern for the environment, and in some cases for political activism, particularly efforts to counter misunderstanding and stereotyping. --
Wicca has enchanted pop culture and many teenagers. The number of Wiccans in the U.S. and Canada is doubling about every 30 months. But neverthelss the percentage of Wiccans in the entire U.S. and Canada populations is still less than 1%.
Wicca Music and the Religion.
"Wicca Rock" may not be religious neutral to many of the Christian faith. Some conservative Christians feel that even gospel music or Contemporary Christian Music is unholy.
Perhaps less about political correctness and more about ecology beliefs which are common to all religions, Wicca music, according to both and, advances that the cycles of nature are the "holy days"; the earth is the true "temple"; and the "plants" and "creatures" their musical partners and inspirations. "We respect life, cherish the free will of sentient beings, and accept the sacredness of all creation. Our bible is the wind and the rain." -
We thrive in the song and spirit of the birds and other creatures of the wild -- our music is written from a love of all life. -
Light over Dark.
Unlike much Gothic Rock,and even alternative rock, Wicca music is bright and cheerful, promoting positive Wicca ideals. "The Craft is a joyous creed; it is also a socially and ecologically responsible one... Love of life in all its forms, is the basic ethic of the Craft." -
Converse to Gothic rock which comes from the dark, Wicca music comes from the light side.
In 2007, Themis, with a strong pro-ecology message morphed from a Punk rock background into the Wicca music realm. The band's followers advance the idea that modern Wicca should be more about nature, ecology and feminism and less about witchcraft and spirtualism. () "We thrive in the song and spirit of the birds and other creatures of the wild -- our music is written from a love of all life. The cycles of nature are our holy days: the earth is our temple, its plants and creatures our partners and teachers so we respect life, cherish the free will of sentient beings, and accept the sacredness of all creation.
