Werner Karl Heisenberg (December 5, 1901 - February 1, 1976) was a German physicist, Nobel Prize winner and one of the people who started a new area of physics called quantum mechanics. Most people think that he is one of the most important scientists of the 20th century. He is also well-known for discovering the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which explains that there is a limit on how well some things can be measured.
Heisenberg was born in Wuerzburg Germany, the son of a professor of history of Byzantium. He went to university to study physics in Munich. Arnold Sommerfeld was one of his teachers.
Heisenberg was a very good student and needed only three years to finish his studies. He then wrote a doctoral thesis about movements in the flows of liquids ("Über Stabilität und Turbulenz von Flüssigkeitsströmen"). In 1924 he became assistant to Max Born at the University of Göttingen and in 1926 worked with Niels Bohr at the University of Copenhagen.
Together with Born and Pascal Jordan he founded Quantum mechanics. At the age of 26 Heisenberg became professor of theoretical physics at the University of Leipzig. This was a very young age for such a job.
In 1932 Heisenberg won the Nobel Prize for physics, for his work in quantum mechanics. Again this was very young, he was only 31 years old.
In 1937 he married Elisabeth Schumacher. They had seven children, one of their sons is well known as a neurobiologist and geneticist, Martin Heisenberg.
During the Second World War, from 1942 to 1945 Werner Heisenberg was head of German atomic research work. This did not result in any working nuclear weapons, possibly because Heisenberg did not want it to. This is not a sure thing. Some people have said that Heisenberg was very much against the Nazis. Some people have said that he must have been for them, because he worked for them.
After the war, he was held as a prisoner at Farm Hall in England from May 1945 to January, 1946, where the British and Americans had many other German scientists.
Later he worked in nuclear research, mainly in West Germany, but he was against nuclear weapons.
He died in Munich Germany, in 1976 at the age of 75.
