Women in Ancient Athens were treated very differently than they are today. They were treated with no respect most of the time.
Birth.
Athenian parents didn't like to give birth to girls. Girls needed a dowry which was often worth a lot of money. Some families would expose baby girls, which means they left them outside to die. Rich families would usually keep girl babies.
Childhood.
A female child would be treated almost the same as any boy, until she was 6. Boys went to school, but girls had to stay at home and learn from their mothers. They would learn how to manage a household (cooking, cleaning, weaving, sewing, managing the household budget, and, if she was from a rich family, managing the slaves).
Even if they didn't learn to read at school, they often learnt at home. They also learned simple facts, like: mythology, religion and sometimes, musical instruments.
They hardly left their houses, only for religious duties.
Marriage.
Girls couldn't be citizens. They left their home at the age of 14 or 15 to get married, sometimes with a man who was much older than she was (about 16 years). Her marriage would be arranged by her father. On most occasions, the father would pick a rich husband for his daughter and for most girls, marriage was just living together.
The girl and her mother had no say in who she married, it was entirely the father's choice.
Before the marriage, a celebration called 'gamos' was held to show that the girl was being passed to her husband, from her father.
The girl would be washed and dressed by female relatives and friends. Then she would wear a crown, a white dress and carry a pomegranate or any other fruit with many seeds.
Life at Home.
A woman would spend all day in her home. If she left she would lose all her social status. She couldn't go out to buy things, to work, to see her family, etc. Slaves would be made to go outside and buy the supplies needed in the house, and her family would have to come and see her (but only the men). Most woman accepted this way of life as it was the way they had been brought up and it was how every other woman in Athens lived.
Quarters.
Women and men were separated in the house. They had different quarters. A man could go into the women's quarters whenever he wanted, but a woman needed permission to enter the man's quarters (which was rarely allowed).
Life Outside the Home.
Women very rarely left their homes.
Careers.
Women could only do some jobs;
Citizenship.
Women could not become citizens of Athens because the men thought the weren't important enough. This means they couldn't vote, they didn't have any say in what happened in Athens and they couldn't run for election.
