A witch is a person, often a woman, who practices witchcraft. A man that practices witchcraft is often called a warlock. The stereotypical witches are commonly portrayed as wicked old women who have wrinkled skin and pointy hats. They wear clothes that are black or purple. They also have warts on their noses and sometimes long claw-like fingernails.
Witches have often been seen outside accepted cultures and faith. People often made them feel unwanted in their societies.
In the Bible the punishment for witchcraft is death (Exodus 22:18, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live," meaning "you should not let a witch live"). "Witch" in the Bible means summoner of spirits, so it might really mean warlock. In Europe in the early modern period persecution of witches (witchhunts, witchcraft trials, in the King James Bible) took place. A widespread scare of witchcraft erupted among the Christian people at that time. As a result, about sixty thousand people were unfairly executed. Most were hanged, but some were burned at the stake. Convicted witches were tied to a long pole, and burned alive. Especially in the early modern period this punishment was often applied.
In the Salem trials, there was Giles Corey who simply refused to speak because he knew he did no wrong. He was pressed to death (using stones) even though he was innocent. Women were burned at the stake for simply sweeping their porches on Sundays or putting herbs in a soup.
Among those punished in that way were people who did not live peacefully with their rulers, like Joan of Arc. In the USA they were executed also.
There were some men who protested against torture and against the chase of witches like Johann Weyer, Friedrich Spee and Anton Praetorius.
The mark of the devil.
People believed that witches had a pact with the devil. The "diabolical mark" (or mark of the devil) was a token left on the skin of the witch.
Most of the time, this was believed to be a mole or birthmark. It was said that since this was a sign of the devil, touching (or picking) it would not hurt the person. People also though that this mark could not bleed.
This soon developed into a safe test for witchcraft. Most often, special "techniques" were used by those doing the test, so that the pricked spot would not bleed, or hurt. Some needles were also found that were special. When touching the skin, the needle would go into its shaft. In that way it could not be felt, and did of course not bleed. Many innocent people were wrongfully convicted because of this test.
Modern-day understanding of Witches.
In the 20th century, a new attempt has been made at understanding witchcraft. Many people say that witches were in fact wise women who were hunted down by the church (mostly for their knowledge of herbs to treat certain diseases). This has led to a new movement. Some of it is known as Wicca. Some of it is known as Shamanism. Often, women understand this as a way to express themselves. Sometimes feminists have also spoken about it. Some of the rites have also been used as a form of protest.
Famous Witches.
All of the following persons were real people.
