Warhammer 40,000 also called 40K is a table-top game in which model armies fight against each other on miniature terrain. It is played using dice to decide what happens and an ruler to tell how far a unit moves.
Each army has many types of weaponry. Each type has different strengths and armor piercing value (AP). There are also different types of units in each army. All units have different statistics which the playera use to their advantage when playing.
Rules.
2+ players are needed for a game. Each player takes it in turns to (in order) move, shoot, then assault. Each unit has a rating for "strength", "toughness", "armour save", "leadership", "initiative", "weapon" and "combat" skill.
Armies.
The armies include: Necrons, Tyranids, Space Marines, Chaos Space Marines, Eldar, Dark Eldar, Tau, Orks and Imperial Guard.
Necrons.
The Necrons are mysterious, silent and skeleton-like warriors. They have powerful technology and armour. The Necrons are one of most ancient race in the Warhammer 40,000 universe. They can be compared to traditional Undead such as vampires, skeletons and zombies.
Tyranids.
In the storyline the Tyranids are merciless predators from another galaxy. They completely eat whole planets before moving on. Tyranids can be compared to the Alien in Ridley Scott's Alien movies.
Space Marines.
The Space Marines are an army of super humans. They were genetically changed to defend humanity in the Warhammer 40,000 universe. There are lots of different groups of Space Marines. These groups are called chapters. All of the chapters are separate from each other. Each chapter has 1000 soldiers in it, and its own uniform, history and equipment. Some chapters have special rules in the game and types of soldier that only they can use. Chapters get and train their own recruits separately. The Space Marine in charge of each chapter is called the Chapter Master.
A lot of Space Marine equipment is very old. No-one knows how to make any more of some things they use, like the powerful Dreadnought armour. Space Marines wear special suits of armour, called power armour, to help them fight better. All Space Marines are genetically engineered to be very strong and tough, much more than most people. They can live for a very long time, and have extra They are also trained to be very brave and religious, as well as being trained to be good at shooting and fighting. Some Space Marines have psychic powers - these are called Librarians in most chapters. There are also Space Marines who act like priests, called Chaplains.
