The Wii (pronounced "we") is a video game console made by Nintendo. It was first released on November 19, 2006. It plays video games made for the Wii, and for the older video game console made by Nintendo - the Nintendo GameCube.
The Wii costs less than the other "Next-Generation" consoles: The PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360. The company says they want to focus more on new ways to play games. The Wii uses a controller, called the Wii Remote, that is very different from the controllers of other video game consoles. It can be held with just one hand, and uses technology that senses the player's movements.
By making the Wii, Nintendo says they are trying to reinvent the way video games are looked at and played. The Wii was targeted for all people of any age or interest. By making it easier to play, Nintendo thinks that they can get people who do not normally play games to start playing.
Disc Channel.
The Disc Channel is used to play Wii and GameCube games.
Wii Shop Channel.
The Wii Shop Channel is used to download Virtual Console and WiiWare games and also other channels.
Mii Channel.
The Mii Channel is used to make avatar (icon)s that can be used in games and other stuff.
News Channel.
The News Channel is used to look up news about various subjects. You need the internet.
Forecast Channel.
The Forecast Channel is used to check the weather in or near your area. You need the internet.
Everybody Votes Channel.
The Everybody Votes Channel is used for Nintendo to poll players around the world about many different subjects.
Internet Channel.
The Internet Channel is used to access the Internet. It uses the Opera Browser.
Check Mii Out Channel.
The Check Mii Out Channel is used to upload and download Miis, as well as voting in contests of the best Mii.
Nintendo Channel.
The Nintendo Channel is used to watch videos, collect information about Wii owners (optional), and to download Nintendo DS demos.
Wii Fit Channel.
The Wii Fit Channel is a channel that lets you play Wii Fit without the game disc. Must be downloaded from the Wii Fit game disc.
The Homebrew Channel.
The Homebrew Channel is a channel that lets you install your own software on your Wii. Installation is very complex and the software titles are not licensed by Nintendo and may damage your console.
Wii Remote.
The Wii Remote is a one-handed controller. It uses accelerometers and infrared detection (from LEDs inside a separate 'sensor bar') to know where it is in 3D space. This lets users control the game using physical movement as well as by button presses. The controller connects to the console using Bluetooth. It has rumble (the controller vibrates when the game being played tells it to do so) and an internal speaker. The device that comes with the Wii sold in stores is the "Nunchuk" unit. It has an accelerometer and a traditional analog stick with two trigger buttons. In addition, a wrist strap can be used to stop the player from dropping or throwing the Wii Remote. Because of problems with the straps, Nintendo has offered a free stronger replacement for all straps. It also comes with a cover called the Wii Remote Jacket, which protects the Wii from being damaged, or broken which is very useful for those out there who are not careful with expensive things and those who find the straps uncomfortable. It also provides a stronger grip.
Attachments for the Wii Remote.
Nintendo and other companies have made attachments for the Wii Remote. They are usually connected by wire by a small plug at the bottom end of the Wii Remote.
Nunchuk.
The Nunchuk is the most common attachment for the Wii Remote. It is designed to fit perfectly into someone's hand. It comes packaged with the Wii. The Nunchuk has an analog stick on the front and 2 buttons on the back. It is required for many Wii games.
Classic Controller.
Nintendo have released a "classic" controller for the Wii. The design is similar to the Super Nintendo Entertainment System's controller, but with two analog sticks. It is ideal for when you play games from older consoles.
Zapper.
Nintendo have also released a gun-like case for the Wii Remote and Nunchuk. It is named the Zapper after a NES gun controller. When the Wii Remote and the Nunchuk are placed inside it, the shape of the controllers in your hands is changed. The Zapper does not actually plug into the Wii Remote, it just holds it in place. The Zapper also includes a free, short game to help you get used to it.
Guitar.
A guitar attachment has also been designed for the Wii. There is a rectangle slot in the middle of it, where the Wii Remote fits in. It is made by Activision for a music game called Guitar Hero III. It comes packed with Guitar Hero III or by itself.
