White supremacy is the belief that white people are better than other races. The words "White supremacy" are sometimes used to describe a political idea that shows the social and political dominance of whites.
It is associated with varying degrees of racism. There is also a desire for racial separation. White supremacy has often resulted in anti-black racism and antisemitism (Anti-Jewish).
Different kinds of white supremacy have different ideas of whiteness, and not all white supremacist groups agree on which group is their greatest enemy. White supremacists frequently consider Jews to be the biggest threat to their cause, because Jews are thought to be able to mix much more easily than other ethnic groups.
History.
Politically, socially and economically, white supremacy was common in the United States before the American Civil War and for decades after. The same is true of apartheid in South Africa and of parts of Europe at different time periods; importantly under Nazi Germany's Third Reich. The amount and nature of white supremacy's influence in western culture is a subject of ongoing debate. In some parts of the United States, many people who were considered non-white could not vote and were barred from government office, and prevented from holding most government jobs — well into the second half of the twentieth century. White leaders often viewed Native Americans and Australian Aborigines as obstacles to progress, rather than as settlers in their own right. Many European-settled countries at the Pacific Ocean limited immigration from the Asian Pacific countries. Many U.S. states banned marriage between races, through "anti-miscegenation laws" until 1967, when these laws were changed. South Africa maintained its white supremacist-like Apartheid system until the early 1990s.
White supremacists have become linked with a racist part of the skinhead subculture, despite the fact that when the skinhead scene first developed in the United Kingdom in the late 1960s, it was heavily influenced by Jamaican rude boys and British mods. By the 1980s,
a large white power skinhead faction had formed.
White supremacist movements and ideas.
White supremacist groups can be found in most countries and regions with a large white population, including North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and Latin America. In all of these locations, their views represent a small amount of the population, and active membership of the groups is quite small. However, a backlash to the non-white immigrants into various European nations has caused a rise in membership in such organizations, as well as an increase in militant white supremacist demonstrations. The militant approach taken by white supremacist groups has caused them to be watched closely by law enforcement officials. Some European countries have laws stopping hate speech, as well as other laws that ban or restrict some white supremacist organizations but not all.
Religious movements.
The Christian Identity movement, which is regarded by other branches of Christianity as heretical, is closely tied to white supremacy. Although the Ku Klux Klan's reasons for supporting racial segregation are not primarily based on religious ideals, some Klan groups are openly Christian Protestant because of their northern European/Germanic roots.
Some white supremacists identify themselves as Odinists, although most Odinists reject white supremacy, and white supremacists make up only a small fraction of those who support Odinism (belief in the gods of Norse mythology). Some white supremacist groups, such as the South African Boeremag, conflate elements of Christianity and Odinism.
The World Church of the Creator, now called the Creativity Movement, believed that a person's race is his religion. Aside from this central belief, its ideology is similar to many Christian Identity groups, in the conviction that there is a Jewish conspiracy in control of the United States government, international banking, and the media. They claim that a Racial Holy War ("RAHOWA"), is destined to happen, which would eliminate Jews and "mud races" from the planet. In the early 1990s, there was a dramatic increase in membership, due to the growing belief in the apocalypse.
